Beyond the Balance Sheet Model of Banking: Implications for Bank Regulation and Monetary
Policy
Greg Buchak, Gregor Matvos, Tomasz Piskorski, and Amit Seru
NBER Working Paper No. 25149
October 2018, Revised January 2020
JEL No. G2,L5
ABSTRACT
Bank balance sheet lending is commonly viewed as the predominant form of lending. We
document and study two margins of adjustment that are usually absent from this view using
microdata in the$10 trillion U.S. residential mortgage market. We first document the limits of the
shadow bank substitution margin: shadow banks substitute for traditional—deposit-taking—
banks in loans which are easily sold, but are limited from activities requiring on-balance-sheet
financing. We then document the balance sheet retention margin: banks switch between
traditional balance sheet lending and selling loans based on their balance sheet strength, behaving
more like shadow banks following negative shocks. Motivated by this evidence, we build and
estimate a workhorse structural model of the financial intermediation sector. Banks and shadow
banks compete for borrowers. Banks face regulatory constraints but benefit from the ability to
engage in balance sheet lending. Critically, departing from prior literature, banks can also choose
to access the securitization market like shadow banks. To evaluate distributional consequences,
we model a rich demand system with income and house price differences across borrowers. The
model is identified using spatial pricing policies of government-sponsored entities and bunching
at the regulatory threshold. We study the quantitative consequences of several policies on lending
volume and pricing, bank stability, and the distribution of consumer surplus across rich and poor
households. Both margins we identify significantly shape policy responses, accounting for more
than $500 billion in lending volume across counterfactuals. Secondary market disruptions such as
quantitative easing have significantly larger impacts on lending and redistribution than capital
requirement changes once we account for these margins. We conclude that a regulatory policy
analysis of the intermediation sector must incorporate the intricate industrial organization of the
credit market and the equilibrium interaction of banks and shadow banks.
Greg Buchak
University of Chicago
5807 S Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
buchak@stanford.edu
Gregor Matvos
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2211 Campus Drive
Global Hub 4361
Evanston IL, 60208
and NBER
gregor.matvos@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Tomasz Piskorski
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway
Uris Hall 810
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
tp2252@columbia.edu
Amit Seru
Stanford Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
655 Knight Way
and NBER
aseru@stanford.edu

