Editor
Erzo F.P. Luttmer

The American Economic Review
Published by the American Economic Association

Coeditors
John Friedman
Yuriy Gorodnichenko
Rema Hanna
Andrei Levchenko
Qingmin Liu
Benjamin Moll
Pietro Ortoleva
Devin Pope
Marzena Rostek
Andres Santos
Uta Schönberg
Frank Verboven
Ekaterina Zhuravskaya

Board of Editors
Nathaniel Baum-Snow
Carola Binder
Aislinn Bohren
Yann Bramoullé
Julia Cagé
Davide Cantoni
Arun Chandrasekhar
Briana Chang
Aimee Chin
James Cloyne
Mariano Massimiliano Croce
Clément de Chaisemartin
Mark Dean
Manasi Deshpande
Francesc Dilmé
Benjamin Faber
Ying Fan
Lucie Gadenne
Cecile Gaubert
Garance Genicot
Daniel Gottlieb
Eric Gould
Paul Grieco
Pauline Grosjean
Joshua Hausman
Randi Hjalmarsson
Jean-François Houde
Nagore Iriberri
Koichiro Ito
Kelsey Jack
Fuhito Kojima
Pablo Kurlat
Ashley Langer
Adriana Lleras-Muney
Yusufcan Masatlioglu
Filip Matějka
Isabelle Mejean
Karel Mertens
Conrad Miller
Rachel Ngai
Antonio Penta
Eduardo Perez-Richet
Vincent Pons
Alex Rees-Jones
Johanna Rickne
James Roberts
Florian Scheuer
Sonja Settele
Manisha Shah
Moses Shayo
Erik Snowberg
Johannes Spinnewijn
Kevin Stange
Johannes Stroebel
Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato
Tavneet Suri
Paolo Surico
Olivier Tercieux
Juuso Toikka
Christoph Trebesch
Shing-Yi Wang
Kaspar Wüthrich

August 21, 2025

Dr. Lulu Wang
Northwestern University Kellogg School of Management
RE: AER-2025-0455: Regulating Competing Payment Networks
Dear Dr. Wang,
I write about your submission, “Regulating Competing Payment Networks.”
With reject-and-resubmit decisions like yours, I typically ask the original
referees for feedback but also solicit the input of a new referee for a fresh look
at the paper. I therefore enclose four referee reports - three from the original
referees (Referees 1 through 3 have the same labels as before) and one from a
new referee (Referee 4).
The repeat-referees all note that the revision responds to many of their concerns
in detail, and they commend you on the significant effort you put towards
adding new data to the already impressive variety of sources, improving the
model exposition, and enriching the consumer-side of the model. They are also
still all enthusiastic about the research question and find the general results
credible. Of course, the model continues to make simplifying assumptions,
especially on the merchant side, where the data appear of poorer quality and
exhibit less useful variation. Overall, Referees 1 and 2 recommend (weak)
Revise-and-resubmit decisions, while Referee 3 recommends an Accept
decision.
The new referee raises concerns with your interpretation of the difference-indifference evidence from the Durbin Amendment and finds the current
counterfactual analyses limited. The referee recommends I reject your paper.
My own read of the new draft left me impressed with the revision, but I share
the referees’ reactions that you could further motivate the need for and likely
impact of some of your modeling decisions and are not fully leveraging the
richness of the model in the current set of counterfactuals. Since the original
referees are uniformly more positive and Referee 4 raises points that – I believe
– you can make progress on, I am more optimistic about the paper’s prospect
for ultimate publication in the AER. I would therefore like to offer you the
opportunity to submit one more revision. I also consulted with Frank Verboven,
the new AER IO co-editor, who fully supports this decision (I will continue
handling your paper going forward).

The revision should focus on four main points:
•

Reduced-form facts. The referees make several, largely expositional
suggestions regarding the descriptive facts that you should take on board.
These include:
o Results in Section III.A:
(a) Caveat the results in Section III.A given the sensitivity to
sample selection.
(b) Address Referee 4 concerns that the difference-in-difference
results are unable to isolate the role of rewards and that the
estimated rewards sensitivity is too high. You already note that
the control group aims to purge the results of some types of
contemporaneous trends, such as changes in merchant
acceptance behavior. Can you provide any evidence on potential
strategic responses by exempt issuers to the Amendment, such
as promotion of debit cards? Alternatively, can you - as a
robustness check - reduce the sensitivity to rewards in model
estimation?
o Results in Section III.B.
(a) Please summarize retailer credit card acceptance rates upfront –
my sense is that this grocery store must be relatively unique in
not accepting credit cards. This will help motivate modeling
assumptions.
As an aside, my understanding of the Nielsen guidelines is that
it is not possible to display results based on data from a single
entity. Please ensure that the paper passes review by the Kilts
Center.
(b) Clarify the interpretation of the results. I agree with the R1 that
one takeaway of the grocery store analysis is that debit and
credit cards substitute and that the Discover evidence alone is
not sufficiently conclusive to rule out this channel fully.

•

Modeling assumptions. The referees raise several follow-up questions
regarding the model setup and implications that I would like you to address:
o At a high level, the paper needs to be more open about the fact that
the merchant data and the current state of merchant card adoption do
not allow you to model merchant behavior as flexibly as one may
like. A few examples:
(a) You rely on the single, possibly not representative merchant
from Section III.B to pin down 𝜎 and use this single retailer to
support the empirical result that merchants are fee-insensitive

(presumably, to current levels of fees!). This is more like a
calibration than an estimation exercise, however, that likely
plays a role in the overall model predictions.
(b) The fact that most merchants accept some type of credit card
today and that you have already exploited Section-III.B grocery
store’s adoption behavior in estimation must mean that the data
do not allow you to identify fixed costs to card acceptance
separately from merchant substitution and heterogeneity. Please
correct me if this is wrong. If not, you should simply state this as
a shortcoming of your approach and explain why you cannot be
more flexible, rather than argue that fixed adoption costs are
small (which R2 does not agree with). Please note that I do not
expect you to incorporate fixed acceptance costs, but please add
a discussion of how such costs might affect agent behavior; R2’s
report contains nice conjectures on this point.
(c) You say that you abstract from non-rewards characteristics
because of Australia’s experience of regulating merchant fees
(Section IV.F.7). I assume, however, that your data does not
contain information on non-rewards characteristics of
consumers’ credit cards and that modeling issuer choices in
dimensions other than fee structures is well beyond the scope of
the paper. As R4 notes, the counterfactuals are therefore best
thought of as short-run predictions, with possible regulations
inducing further strategic responses by issuers. R2’s suggestion
of representing such concerns as an artificial quality degradation
in the counterfactuals is nice, but I do not necessarily expect you
to implement it.
There are other places like this in the paper, especially in
Section IV.F; I hope these examples clarify what I am looking
for.
o The referees continue to ask for improvements in your treatment of
credit and debit cards on the consumer side.
First, R1-R3 dislike that they do not substitute. They also make
several suggestions for how you might introduce substitution in the
model (see R1 and R2’s comments here) or clarify why exactly you
make this assumption (see R3’s suggestion on this point). Since
your consumer-side data is better, I wondered if you could make
some progress on this point, but I would also be satisfied with a
more detailed motivation for the need for this assumption based on
modeling challenges or data shortcomings that this might introduce.

Second, R4 notes that not all consumers are able to obtain credit
cards. Translating this to the model means that your choice set is
mis-specified for a segment of consumers. My conjecture was that
with your current setup, such constraints would lead to an
understatement of the relative value of credit cards. Please clarify
whether this is correct. Are you able to perform a crude robustness
check by re-estimating the model under the assumption that a
segment of (lower income) consumers do not have access to credit
cards?
Third, R2 suggests clarifying the information environment for
consumers, its interaction with the consumer merchant choice, and
the role of card preferences in merchant choice.
•

Counterfactuals. The referees believe you can further strengthen the
realism and usefulness of the counterfactual analyses. R1 and R2 suggest
several modifications and additions. To me, the most relevant are the
following:
o

o
o

o

o

I agree with R2 that reducing merchant fees down to the cost of
capital is unlikely (point 2c and point 2a, even though I do not
expect you to simulate a counterfactual where credit cards are
eliminated from the market, which is interesting, but maybe not as
relevant in the current environment). The referee therefore suggests
a more nuanced reduction sequence that would also illustrate the
key features of the model better, as requested by R4.
In the spirit of better illustrating model behavior, I think R1’s
suggestion of decomposing the fee cap effect into different channels
would be very useful.
Allowing for substitution between payment types may increase the
role of new payment methods (R2 point 2d). Depending on your
ability to adopt the above suggestions, you might be able to engage
more with this or at a minimum note that demand limits the impact
of new payment methods.
I also like R1’s suggestion to investigate the importance of
consumer multihoming, which would speak to the broader twosided markets literature. That said, if you find that this takes you too
far afield from presenting a coherent story with the counterfactuals,
I would also be fine with leaving this point for future work.
Lastly, R4 asks about unregulated optimal behavior. My guess was
that this serves as the baseline for the counterfactuals already, but
please correct me if I am wrong.

•

Exposition. R4 and Frank Verboven ask that you further improve the
writing and make the model section more accessible. Frank Verboven
writes:
“My main concern while reading the paper relates to the exposition. The
writing is reasonably well structured and polished, but I still find it hard to
read. I think this is partly because the author sometimes takes for granted
that a reader knows the institutions. For example, the first page refers to
“poorly designed price regulations” that imply distortions but is vague on
what these regulations mean. The second page then describes the finding on
the impact of the basis point reduction in debit rewards after the Durbin
Amendment Act, but without much context. This Act is further referred to a
few times in the introduction but only explained at a late stage. In general,
the author could do a better job in presenting the paper at a higher level, for
a broader audience that is not necessarily familiar with the regulations.”
Please take a stab at further tightening the paper’s exposition with the
objective of (a) clarifying what can and cannot be done with the data at
hand, and (b) focusing the paper on the essential pieces of the setting that
are relevant for the modeling and the interpretation of your results. I realize
this was your job market paper, and it still essentially reads as one, with a
lot of detail on nuances of the payments market that are unlikely to be
material to your results. You may also want to shorten the footnotes and
shorten the Appendix, which contains further details that – while interesting
– are not central to the substance of the paper (for example, the detailed
section on price coherence). To the extent that a reader would like to
engage with the Appendix material, I would recommend that you include
only the most important material related to the data compilation and
collection, the empirical estimation approach, and the model derivation.

The referees make several other useful, but maybe less central, suggestions that
I recommend discussing as you go through the draft. I am leaving the extent to
which you choose to address them in detail up to you. Lastly, Frank Verboven
suggests connecting with Knittel and Stango’s paper “Price Ceilings as Focal
Points for Tacit Collusion” (AER 2003) on price ceilings as focal points for
collusion in credit card markets. Since this relates closely to price caps, it may
be useful to discuss whether institutions have changed since their analysis and
whether caps may create a risk of collusion in your setting (not at all to be dealt
with, but to mention as a caveat).
I would also like to remind you that the paper will ultimately need to follow the
AEA data & replication policy. So, making sure your code is well documented

and adheres to this policy will save you extra work down the road. It also
minimizes the chance that your estimates change at a late stage in the review
process, with all the resulting complications that happen due to any such
changes.
When you resubmit, please include a cover letter that summarizes what you
did. The referees note that you did not fully address some of their earlier
questions in your prior response. Please do so in this round (e.g., the “no
response” / “(mostly) unsatisfactory response” points from R1). Please return
the next version to me within the next 12 months. Once you re-submit, I plan to
send the new manuscript to the referees one more time before coming to a final
decision. I look forward to reading the next version of this work.
Best regards,

Katja Seim
Coeditor
American Economic Review

