Referee report for “Regulating Competing Payment Networks” (resubmission)
Overview
The report begins by discussing the extent to which the author addressed my original
comments. Then, it offers some new comments on the revised materials, including some ideas
for new counterfactuals.
To summarize my thoughts: the revised article is much improved over the original one, in large
part because it removed some of the “reduced-form fact” analysis that I identified as flawed in
my original report. The model exposition has also been greatly improved, and the author has
made better note of the model’s limitations (although further work here is required; see
comments below).
Overall, I think that the “reduced-form fact” section is still weak: the Durbin Amendment
difference-in-difference analysis is not entirely robust to including all debit card transactions,
the part on merchant benefits from card acceptance features some modelling choices that
require further justification, the claim that merchants should be fee insensitive based on
descriptive evidence is not well argued, and the point made by the “mechanism for sales
increase” was not conceptually clear to me. I elaborate on these points below. Although the
data underlying the results is perhaps the best available for analysis of payment card markets,
it is not excellent. It often felt that, in the reduced-form facts section, the author tried to squeeze
more out of the data than is warranted (this was perhaps most clear in the indirect argument
that merchants should be fee-insensitive, which is made without directly observing card
acceptance choices in a representative sample of merchants, or in the analysis based on a single
grocery store). This weakness, though, does not doom the article: the model is well motivated
and developed in the revised draft. The model analysis, further, represents the article’s main
contribution. Thus, I suggest that the author downplays the “reduced-form facts” in favour of
greater emphasis on the model and counterfactual analysis. The reason that I suggest some new
counterfactuals is that replacing some of the “reduced-form facts” with further analysis of the
model would improve the article given my comments above.
Comments from original submission
Here, I list selected comments that I made on the original submission (in quotations) and
discuss the extent to which the author has address them.
- “Appendix Table G.1 suggests that there are 285 payment-card issuers. The author,
however, includes only 36 issuers in the sample used in the difference-in-differences
analysis, at least in part based on the excluded issuers having made large acquisitions.
The rationalization for the sample-selection rule is unclear from the data section, and
the generalizability of results that are obtained from a selected 13% of issuers is
somewhat dubious. These problems could be readily addressed by (i) adding a
justification for the sample selection rule and (ii) demonstrating the robustness of the
difference-in-difference results to the sample selection rule.”
o Fully satisfactory response: the author has demonstrated robustness in Figure
A.2 and rationalized the sample selection rule in Appendix A.1.
- “For information on payment method choice, the article uses the Atlanta Federal
Reserve’s Diary of Consumer Payment Choice and the Survey of Consumer Payment
Choice, also from the Atlanta Fed. The author combines these datasets “to build a

-

-

-

transaction-level dataset on consumers’ payment choices over three-day windows,”
using “the data from the 2015–2020 waves of both surveys.” Several questions arise
here. How were the data combined? Do they include the same consumers, or did the
author pool together data from two distinct sources? Are these surveys intended to be
representative? The Nielsen Homescan panel also provides information on payment
method choice. It would be helpful here (i) to mention which variables are included in
the Homescan panel, and (ii) to discuss the relative strengths of the payment diaries and
the Homescan panel in learning about payment method choice.”
o Mostly satisfactory response: the author says that “There is a common set of
identifiers” between the diary and survey. I assume that this means that there is
complete overlap between the respondents, although it is not clear from the
author’s wording. The author has clarified that the datasets are representative
and provided a comparison of the diary/survey to Homescan.
“There is little said in the data section about the availability of data on merchants. It is
unclear at this point in the article how the author can credibly estimate a model of
merchant card acceptance and of merchant pass-through of payment card fees into
prices without direct data on merchant acceptance and merchant prices.”
o Somewhat satisfactory response: the author has noted that the consumer
payment surveys include information on whether merchants accept cards. These
data are imperfect, as merchants are selected on the basis of consumer purchases
and the data relies on consumer recall of payment method acceptance (my guess
is that this is probably bad), but at least the author explains the provenance of
the merchant adoption information.
“The article conducts difference-in-differences analysis of the effects of the Durbin
Amendment on signature debit card and credit card payment volumes, using large
financial institutions as the treatment group and small financial institutions as the
control group. First, it is not explained how signature debit cards (which require the
consumer to sign a receipt to pay) differ from standard debit cards. It is also not
explained why the difference-in-differences analysis is conducted only for signature
debit cards rather than all debit cards. Combined with the fact that the analysis is
performed on data from a relatively small subset of issuers, this raises doubts about the
generality of the results.”
o Mostly satisfactory response: The author has rationalized the focus on
signature debit transactions and performed the analysis using total debit
transactions. The results for all debit transactions (Figure A.15) are mostly
statistically insignificant (except for 3 years since implementation, which is
marginally significant). This makes me somewhat concerned about the validity
of the author’s finding that consumers are sensitive to rewards. The author
should at least mention that the results become weaker when all debit
transactions are used in the main text. As noted above, the author justified the
subset selection in a satisfactory manner.
“Additionally, the analysis suffers from the problem that, given the substitutability of
debit cards issued by large and small financial institutions, small institutions were
affected by the Durbin Amendment and are therefore not an appropriate control group.”

-

-

-

-

-

o Mostly satisfactory response: the author has continued to use small issuers as
the control group but has explained that this choice is unlikely to affect the
results in footnote 6.
“Next, the article assesses the extent to which merchants raise their sales by accepting
cards. The author does do by running a logistic regression on a consumer/transactionlevel panel derived from the Diary of Consumer Payment Choice.”
o Fully satisfactory response: the quotation above is the beginning of a long
comment detailing problems with a regression that the author has removed from
the article.
“As such, Figure 4 does not provide clear-cut evidence of the substitutability of debit
cards and merchant cards among merchants.”
o Fully satisfactory response: the author has removed the problematic analysis
of Figure 4 from the article.
“The model enforces several relationships that may not hold empirically. First,
merchants in the model accept cards to increase their sales from each consumer, but the
consumer will shop at the merchant irrespective of the merchant’s card adoption choice.
This contrasts with a model in which consumers spend a fixed amount but choose at
which merchants to shop in response to these merchants’ card adoption decisions.”
o Mostly satisfactory response: the author has clarified that the budget
constraint means that “card acceptance reallocates spending rather than
increasing overall spending.” In reality, card acceptance likely results in some
business stealing from rival merchants and some market expansion. It would be
ideal for the author to estimate the extent of business stealing versus market
expansion, although I do not view it as a requirement for publication.
“The assumption that a merchant enjoys a fixed boost in sales 𝛾 when selling to a
consumer who uses a card has some undesirable properties. When consumers carry both
a credit and a debit card (as I suspect most do in practice), then the merchant has no
incentive to accept credit cards; credit cards offer no incremental sales increase over
debit cards.”
o No response: I could not locate a response to this comment in the article. I
struggle to imagine that consumers could carry two credit cards without
carrying a debit card, which I had thought necessarily follows from having a
bank account. If credit card consumers also have a debit card, and incremental
consumer spending is constant across debit and credit cards, the fact that
merchants adopt high-free credit cards seems to be an artifact of the somewhat
arbitrary assumption that consumers may carry only up to two cards. (I may be
missing something here.)
“Relatedly, the modelling of rewards is unnatural. Consumers enjoy a boost to their
income for adopting a card even if they never use the card.”
o Unsatisfactory response: I think that the author may have tried to respond to
this comment with the text on page 21 reading “The pecuniary utility for singlehoming agents is micro-founded in the consumer’s optimal consumption
problem across merchants. The optimized value of log utility for a consumer
with CES preferences that generate the demand curve in Equation 28 is

-

-

-

-

approximately log(U).” This requires more explanation; the microfoundation is
not explicitly provided and is not clear to me.
“Another concern relates to merchant pricing. In general, markups and pass-through
depend on the slope and curvature of demand, respectively. CES demand has one
parameter that governs both markups and pass-through.”
o Mostly unsatisfactory response: in Section IV.F.2, the author claims that
“Appendix F.6 extends the model to allow for an arbitrary degree of passthrough.” This is not true. Appendix F.6 provides analysis of a case with no
pass-through. I did not see anything in Appendix F.6 about allowing an arbitrary
degree of pass-through; the misleading statement in the main text is the main
reason why I have labelled the response as “mostly unsatisfactory.” With that
said, the additions in Appendix F.6 with no pass-through are much appreciated
and interesting. I would suggest that the author acknowledges the problems
associated with full pass-through and explains what happens in the opposite
case with no pass-through. Upon making these changes and removing the false
statement from the text, I would update my assessment to “Fully satisfactory
response.”
“In addition, there is an inconsistency between the model and data in the specification
of primary and secondary cards.”
o Somewhat satisfactory response: the author has revised the procedure for
determining first and second cards as detailed by Appendix A.3.1 in light of the
comment. However, this appendix is missing details. Several parts are
incomplete (the first sentence of the appendix is incomplete; the final sentence
of the “Cash-only consumers” section is incomplete; the section describes
various cut-offs without mentioning their numerical values). Overall, it seems
that the author has improved the procedure for choosing primary and secondary
cards, but errors in the appendix make it hard to definitely conclude that there
has been an improvement. Also, it would be good to briefly describe the
procedure in the main text.
“The way that consumers choose primary and secondary cards may be suboptimal.”
o Fully satisfactory response: the author has acknowledged that the consumer
card adoption specification “rules out the possibility that Visa complements
AmEx more when Visa is accepted at more stores that do not accept AmEx,” as
I pointed out. The author, however, estimates an alternative model with
acceptance complementarity and argues that it is inconsistent with the data in
Section F.7. In my view, the author has done enough to address my comment.
“There seems to be another model/data inconsistency in the part of estimation that
matches the model-simulated effects of the Durbin Amendment to the difference-indifferences estimates. The goal of this exercise is to estimate consumer sensitivity to
rewards. Two ways of simulating Durbin are: (i) by limiting interchange fees on debit
cards and re-solving for equilibrium under each trial value of the parameter, or (ii) by
adjusting only consumer debit rewards, reducing them by the same extent that they fell
upon the enactment of Durbin. The article seems to use the second approach given that,
rather than solve the full model in estimation, the author uses a discrete-choice

-

-

representation of the model that holds only when merchant acceptance decisions are
held fixed. This suggests that the author is not re-solving for equilibrium. If so, the
estimation procedure suffers from the problem that the empirical and model-based
quantities being matched are not analogous; the difference-in-difference estimates
capture all equilibrium responses to Durbin. Furthermore, the problem that the control
group in the difference-in-differences analysis was affected by the Durbin Amendment
biases the author’s estimates obtain by matching the difference-in-differences
estimates.”
o Mostly satisfactory response: the author states “I hold fixed merchant actions
because my difference-in-difference estimates remove any equilibrium effects
of merchant actions.” I’ll take his word on it, but some additional explanation
would be helpful.
“First, it is unclear why American Express’s interchange fee is not capped in the
counterfactual that limits credit card fees.”
o Fully satisfactory response: AmEx’s fees are capped in the revised manuscript.
“Also, the article should report standard errors for the counterfactuals (i.e., in Tables 6
and 7). “
o Fully satisfactory response: the author has reported standard errors.
“Another concern is that the author repeals the Durbin Amendment by setting the debit
card merchant fee cap to 1% on the basis that 1% was close to the average pre-Durbin
debit card merchant fee rate. Why not solve for a new equilibrium without any cap?”
o Fully satisfactory response: the author has explained the logic of increasing
debit fees rather than lifting the cap entirely in footnote 34.
“Last, there is a concern in the “increased competition” counterfactual that adding a
new credit card network mechanically increases credit card usage by giving consumers
new logit shocks for credit cards. Given that credit card usage is welfare reducing in
the model, adding a new card is thus welfare reducing before the pro-competitive effects
of entry (changes in prices/fees) are considered. It would be good to take note of this
concern, even if it is not addressed via a change in the counterfactual.”
o No response: I could not find a response to this comment in the article.
Although the “increased competition” counterfactual has been removed in
favour of a focus on monopolization, my original comment also applies to a
comparison of a monopoly regime with the baseline regime.

Ideas for additional counterfactuals
- It would be interesting to decompose the channels by which the fee cap affects welfare
by computing the counterfactual (i) holding fixed prices and merchant adoption, (ii)
holding fixed prices, (iii) holding fixed merchant adoption, and (iv) holding fixed
neither (which, of course, is what the author is currently doing). I suppose that
merchants compete away most of their gains from fee caps by reducing prices following
the fee cap. Given the multi-sided nature of the market, it would also be interesting to
see how participation changes on the merchant side affect consumer welfare and
whether this dynamic is relevant at all for the welfare results.
- The results regarding the effects of competition on platform fees in Teh et al. suggest
that multihoming plays a crucial role in determining whether competition tends to raise
or lower merchant fees. To my understanding, there is no empirical paper that estimates
how multihoming affects the extent to which competition shifts the relative balance of

consumer fees (or rewards) and merchant fees. The author has an opening to do exactly
this by running the monopoly counterfactual under alternative assumptions regarding
consumer multihoming. This exercise would also suggest how monopolization would
affect welfare in payment card (or, more generally, platform markets) with different
levels of multihoming than the US payment card market.
New comments
Here, I offer some smaller comments that I believe that the author will be able to address in a
satisfactory manner.
- How was the large retailer in Section III.B chosen? Are there any other retailers in the
sample period that began accepting credit cards, to provide a sense of effects beyond a
single retailer and beyond the grocery category?
- The article uses the number of trips as the outcome when studying merchant benefits
from card acceptance, claiming that revenue is unsuitable for use due to its fat tails. But
the retailer considers sales effects, not foot traffic effects, when choosing whether to
adopt a payment card. Wouldn’t a log transform of revenue deal with the fat tails?
- Why use a relatively exotic Poisson model as opposed to a more standard linear model
in the analysis of merchant benefits from card acceptance? Are the results from a linear
model qualitatively similar?
- Why isn’t the credit card share at the large grocery equal to zero before it began
accepting credits cards (Figure 4a)? If there is measurement error in the data, how does
this affect the author’s estimation procedure?
- The first sentence of Section III.B.2, that “Credit card users shop more at the grocer
because consumers value the flexibility of paying with credit --- not because of
rewards” is imprecise and not entirely clear to me. The author showed that consumers
are sensitive to rewards, which are thus likely a large motivator of credit card usage.
Thus, the flexibility of paying with credit is likely valued by consumers because credit
card usage entails rewards. The author also states that the flexibility of paying with
credit may be valued by consumers because consumers like to make large purchases
with credit, but this begs the question. There must be some reason why consumers like
to make large purchases with credit (perhaps because they dislike using credit, as the
author argues, but the rewards accumulated on large purchases are especially high). The
conclusion that I draw from Figure 5 is that credit cards are highly substitutable with
each other but weakly substitutable with other payment methods.
- The author concludes from Figure 5(a) that higher Discover rewards do not affect
consumer choices about which stores to visit. I have two comments on this conclusion:
o The author focuses only on grocery stores. Perhaps consumers’ food shopping
is not impacted by rewards given that food is a necessity, but other areas of
spending would be affected. Can the author repeat the analysis for other
categories?
o I am not even sure that the conclusion is correct. It looks like there are upticks
in the black curve during the periods in which Discover offers higher rewards
for groceries. Then again, the dashed line also seems to increase. It would be
helpful for the author to estimate the differential impact of higher Discover
rewards on Discover users versus non-Discover users using a fixed effects
regression; this would allow the author to conduct inference on the impact of
higher rewards on the number of trips.

-

-

-

-

-

-

In Figure 6, a line labelled “OptBlue” appears, but “OptBlue” is never discussed in the
main text (although it is summarized in a figure note). I fail to see the point of including
this second line as it does not influence the author’s argument in Section III.C.1.
What does the author mean “Since every Visa/MC merchant also accepts AmEx”? From
experience, many merchants refuse AmEx but accept Visa and MC. Also, doesn’t this
statement clash with the author’s preceding statement that merchant adoption strategies
tend to follow a hierarchical pattern? Perhaps the author meant to say that “every AmEx
merchant also accepts Visa/MC”? Even if so, it seems hard to believe that there is not
a miniscule share of merchants that accept AmEx but not Visa/MC.
Figure 6 does not directly tell us about the extent of merchant multihoming. What we
would need to assess this extent are additional lines showing the number of merchants
on various combinations of the networks (Visa + MC, Visa + Amex, etc.).
It does not immediately follow that large effects of card adoption on sales mean that
merchants should be insensitive to fees. As the author notes in Section III.B.3, whether
the sales increase from card adoption makes adoption worthwhile to a merchant
depends on the merchant’s margins (as well as the merchant’s fixed costs of adoption).
If, e.g., there was a large mass of merchants with margins around 20% and no fixed
costs of adoption, then small changes in fees would change the adoption decision of
many merchants. The elasticity of adoption with respect to fees similarly depends on
the distribution of fixed costs of card adoption.
Is anything lost by assuming that card users never prefer to pay with cash? As the author
notes, the consumer’s random selection to use either the primary or secondary card
could arise from a model with preference shocks at the level of a transaction and
payment method. It would seem natural for there to be some shock for using cash as
well. Perhaps the author may overstate the benefits to consumers of payment cards by
ruling out the possibility that sometimes consumers would prefer to use cash?
Page 18 reads “Second, consistent with the evidence in Section III.B.1, rewards do not
affect relative consumption choices across merchants.” But it seems that Section III.B.1
(“The Effects of Accepting Credit Cards”) is about how credit card acceptance by a
single large merchant affected sales at the merchant, not about rewards or a comparison
of consumption across merchants. Perhaps the author meant to refer to Section III.B.2.
Section V.C.1 states that “my estimated retail margin of 15.6 percent is also similar to
the aggregate markups of 15-20% used in macro studies of misallocation.” However,
Section III.B.3 reads “credit card acceptance is profitable as long as margins exceed
20%. Census statistics indicate gross margins in the grocery industry were around 27%
during this period.” The author should fix the consistency between these parts of the
paper, as the earlier argument that merchant should be insensitive to fees seems to rely
on margins exceeding 20% (although, as discussed, this argument is flawed). Also, the
author should also be consistent in writing out “percent” or using the “%” sign.
The claim that “Capping fees at the cost of cash also simulates the effects of merchants
freely surcharging consumers for the cost of card acceptance” in Section VI.A requires
greater explanation.
A more appropriate name for Section VI.C would be “Reducing Competition Between
Private Networks.”

