Review of manuscript AER-2025-0455
“Regulating Competing Payment Networks” by Lulu Wang
This is my second report on a previously rejected and resubmitted version of the manuscript
AER-2023-1664 which had the same title and similar research questions. In what follows, I
briefly summarize the revised manuscript and focus the remainder of the review on the main
issues of concern.
The author studies the market for payments in the U.S. He develops a model with three types
of players: networks, consumers and merchants. Networks offer products (cards) with observed
and unobserved characteristics, both valued by the consumers. Consumers are heterogeneous in
their income and preferences over payment methods. Merchants are heterogeneous in terms of
increased sales from card acceptance. A static game unfolds in three stages. In the first stage,
networks set merchant fees and promised adoption utilities for consumers. In the second stage,
consumers and merchants make adoption and pricing choices. In the third stage, consumers make
decisions of where to make consumption purchases. The author combines several data sets to
estimate parameters of the model. Using parameter estimates he then conducts a counterfactual
simulation by constraining debit and credit card merchant fees at the level of the cost of cash.
Results of the counterfactual simulation suggest significant reduction in credit card use, lower
merchant costs and lower retail prices. Consumer and total welfare increase by $36 and $31
billion, respectively. By comparing outcomes of the simulation scenario with the implications of
the Durbin Amendment’s regulation of debit card interchange fees (with an estimated negative
total welfare impact of $8 billion), the author concludes that poor regulation practices can be
more detrimental to welfare than no regulation.
The new version of the paper has become better along several dimensions which were previously areas of concern. Specifically, the author collected more data, reported new reduced form
evidence, and conducted a robustness analysis of the full pass-through assumption. He also
modified the consumer side of the model by adding consumer heterogeneity along the income
and reward sensitivity dimensions and included additional parameters into the model. At the
same time, several previously raised issues still apply. The biggest concern is on the merchant
side where sales benefits from card acceptance are not driven by consumer shopping behavior
and an absence of acceptance costs raises concerns about the counterfactual predictions. On the
consumer side, the biggest concern is the consistency between the adoption and usage stages
where, in the latter, consumers do not substitute between two electronic means of payment if
they are debit and credit. Consumer heterogeneity along monetary dimensions does not match
potential differences in non-pecuniary benefits between high and low income consumers. Last
but not least, it is not clear if a significant intervention does not lead to a much faster than
predicted disintermediation of cards. I detail my comments below.

Comments
1. Model of consumer and merchant behavior. The author has introduced consumer heterogeneity with respect to monetary variables such as income and reward sensitivity. He
also included an additional parameter χ which is supposed to capture complementarities
between the cards (if χ > 0) or incremental adoption costs (if χ < 0).
(a) Merchant acceptance costs. Unfortunately, not much has been done for the merchant
side of the model. When discussing the role of acceptance costs the author mentions
that “machines are cheap, and the incremental cost of accepting an additional network
is zero” (p.25). While equipment costs are probably indeed relatively low, it is total

acceptance costs instead that matter for merchant’s acceptance decisions. How likely
is it that merchant acquirers use two-part tariffs with a variable component priced
at or near marginal cost such that the surplus is extracted by means of fixed fees?
The fees may include first time installation/setup fees, costs of point of sale solutions
(e.g., electronic ordering/delivering), or can be buried even deeper in the long-term
contracts with the payment service provider (as is often the case with Clover). Also,
while the monetary component is clearly present it may not be the only cost incurred
by the merchants. This is particularly true if the merchant makes a card acceptance
choice for the first time. Substantial costs may be related to integrating a new network
into existing accounting and bookkeeping systems, training employees, dealing with
the risks of chargebacks, etc. For example, Huynh et al. (2022) (who you cite on p.5),
report that “the rental cost of terminals represents only a small proportion of the
total costs” and that the larger part of acceptance cost seems to be driven by various
fees (p.34). Similarly, the fact that small and medium retailers are less likely to accept
all payment options than large chain stores suggests the presence of fixed costs that
can be recovered only if the market size facing a merchant is sufficiently large. To reemphasize the importance of an adequate model of merchant acceptance decisions and
the role of merchant acceptance costs in this model I provide the following example of
how the equilibrium response can change depending on the underlying assumptions.
Merchants’ net profits from participating in a card market are given by the difference
between their revenue and acceptance costs, where both are functions of a given
acceptance choice Ms , i.e., Πs (Ms ) = Rs (Ms ) − Fs (Ms ). Merchant s then prefers
to accept Ms as long as Πs (Ms ) ≥ 0. Suppose that merchants’ acceptance costs
are large, Fs (Ms ) >> 0 and that Πs (Ms ) = 0.1 Then, even a small reduction in
market size facing a merchant with acceptance combination Ms would trigger nonacceptance (provided Fs (Ms ) remains constant). If the market equilibrium is fragile
to small perturbations in market conditions, a small reduction in the utilities from
using cards can make consumers use them less and thus lead to a sharp drop in
merchant acceptance. Hence, the question of welfare maximizing levels of fees in the
payments industry can be fairly tricky. I will revisit this in my comments below on
the counterfactual simulations.
(b) Consumer utility function and shopping choice. Why does mean unobserved utility of
a given card, Ξωi , not vary with consumer type? It is plausible that consumers with
higher income have different consumption bundles and, hence, receive more utility
along any dimension from using a given card than low income consumers? How does
allowing for consumer heterogeneity along monetary dimensions but not along other
characteristics affect the results? Can the result that reward sensitivity is increasing
with income be driven by this asymmetric heterogeneity assumption? It would be
nice if the author can allow Ξωi to vary with consumer income (at least in terms of
discrete income types).
My previous question is in part dictated by the difficulties in interpreting current
findings. In general, I would expect consumer price sensitivity to decline as income
increases. Higher responsiveness of high-income consumers to rewards does not seem
to require higher absolute price sensitivity if high income consumers spend substantially more on their cards. Due to the high total value of all transactions, the amount
of pecuniary rewards is naturally higher for richer individuals. Hence, even with low

For example, this could be an outcome of a second-degree price discrimination by merchant acquirers setting
merchant-specific two-part tariffs.

price/reward sensitivity high income consumers should be gaining more from adopting
and using cards than their low income counterparts.
More discussion on the agents’ information sets is needed. There is very little discussion of how consumers interact with merchants and how much information they
possess about the individual merchant decisions. As the author claims that the merchant indifference (or avoided cost) test conditions in Rochet and Tirole (2011) are
satisfied in his model setup, all consumers must behave as if they interact with merchants only once, hence, the term “tourist”. In reality, consumers make purchases
daily and interact with merchants repeatedly. As a result, consumers are typically
well aware where to shop to be able to pay with a given payment method. If the
consumer-preferred method is rejected, the merchant may lose this consumer’s purchases to competing merchants instead of losing additional sales to this consumer.
Hence, merchant competition for the consumers is likely to be more intense when consumers change their shopping behavior (instead of the payment choice) in response to
merchant acceptance decisions. Additional details on what consumers know and how
they allocate their purchases across merchants are needed. For example, it looks like
consumers observe merchant prices and acceptance decisions prior to making their
own adoption choice (i.e., they have full information about these quantities). If this is
correct, why do consumers not direct all their purchases toward merchants accepting
their favorite payment choice such that there is a perfect sorting of consumers across
merchants depending on the adoption and acceptance combination of the two? In the
present model, there are no search or transport costs. Hence, if only one merchant
accepts credit cards it should be able to attract all consumers willing to use the card.
In this case, merchants are likely to compete fiercely for the market of credit card
transactions and an increase in sales of one merchant implies a corresponding loss
by other merchants. This does not seem to be the case in the current setup with a
fixed distribution of sales benefits γ. Shouldn’t sales benefits due to a given merchant
acceptance be decreasing in the total number of grocers accepting cards? Overall,
the paper still needs more details on how consumer choice of payment methods maps
into merchant benefits from card acceptance.
I also do not like the fact that consumers are unwilling to substitute between debit
and credit cards when making purchases. Both methods are electronic and probably
have more common features with each other than either of them has with cash. This
is clearly true for online transactions. Is it a typical behavior that a consumer holds
one or more credit cards and does not have a debit account? How are balances on the
cards paid at the end of a billing cycle in this case? In this respect, complementarity
between debit and credit cards at least at the adoption stage appears sensible. At
the same time, I think that Figure 4 suggests that there is a meaningful substitution
from cash and debit transactions to credit card transactions. Unfortunately, there is
some valuable information missing. The RHS panel (b) “Effects on the number of
trips” only illustrates the change in trips by credit card consumers. What happens
to the number of trips by cash and debit card consumers. Did they decline by the
same amount? This evidence is important in understanding where the increase in
sales is coming from. Is it possible that consumers who previously bought from this
Large Grocer using cash or debit actually preferred to use credit but could not do so
because it was not accepted?
I do not understand footnote 12, which suggests that short-term transaction-specific
incentives do not affect consumer usage decisions of credit versus debit cards, while
rewards on all debit transactions do affect the adoption choice. Does Figure 5 apply

only to consumers who can potentially substitute between Discover and debit (i.e.,
face the choice between them and cash) or is it an aggregate pattern across all consumers? Is it possible that the pattern on the figure is generated by two groups of
consumers? Consumers in one group do not have any credit cards to substitute away
from, while consumers in the second group have another credit card in addition to
Discover making it easy to switch without using their debit cards. This question can
probably be addressed by reporting the probability of observing consumers with a
debit card and Discover credit adoption combination only (i.e., without other cards
from Visa or MC). If this group is relatively small or cannot be isolated for the
purpose of the exercise, the evidence cannot be used in support of no substitution
between debit and credit cards.
Also, would it be possible to enforce debit card adoption if a consumer chooses to
adopt a credit card such that the choice set contains options of being (1) cash-only
user, (2) cash and debit user, (3) debit and one credit card user, and (4) debit and
two credit cards user?
(c) Differences between 3- and 4-party systems are important in the counterfactuals.
Assuming away the market for issuers & acquirers is not innocuous when there is a
significant change in the fee structure. The three-party system may be more efficient
than a 4-party system because of the absence of a double-marginalization problem
between issuers and acquirers and also because of no duplication of fixed costs of
entry into the market. Hence, MC and Visa are likely to be more adversely affected
than AmEx. If the merchant fees are regulated, it is not clear how sustainable
issuing and acquiring businesses can be under significantly lower volumes of credit
card transactions from the consumer side. This comment is similar in spirit to the
one where high merchant acceptance fees may lead to a quick disintermediation of
electronic payment methods but applies to the providers of the cards. It may well be
the case that significantly lower merchant fees can lead to exit of MC and Visa from
the market. Can the author compute total and consumer welfare for the case when,
after the regulation, the only credit card surviving in the market is AmEx? This
exercise can also illustrate the role of competition in rewards between card providers
for the level of excessive card adoption.
2. Counterfactual simulation.
(a) Excessive adoption (and presumably usage) of credit cards implies that welfare can
be increased by means of reducing adoption. What if credit cards are completely
eliminated from the market? Is the counterfactual total welfare without credit cards
still higher than the one in the factual equilibrium? What about consumer welfare?
Edelman and Wright (2015) suggests that the card overuse can be so large that
consumers can be better off in a market without any intermediation. Can the authors
confirm this empirically? Also, the author should be able to trace a sequence of
equilibria for different levels of merchant fees starting from the factual level all the
way until credit cards are no longer used in equilibrium. This potentially may require
a reversal of the fees, with consumers instead of receiving rewards having to pay
merchants for the opportunity to use credit cards.
(b) Why should unobserved characteristics of different cards remain invariant to the
dramatic changes in the equilibrium usage of cards? If regulation severely constrains
network profits, the product quality may deteriorate, or some products may no longer
be available at such a low price. For example, credit providers may be unwilling

to offer the credit function at the same price which, as the author acknowledges,
enters the unobserved utility from different credit cards. Potentially, this should
have further self-reenforcing effects of even lower usage and adoption of credit cards.
Can the author compute a reduction in unobserved product characteristics in a new
equilibrium (with fees constrained at the level of cost of cash) that would make cards
effectively unused, i.e., where the average usage drops below a certain critical level
(such as 1%)? Does it take a lot to drive cards out?
(c) With material merchant acceptance costs even minor interventions can lead to a quick
disintermediation of electronic means of payment. This can happen either because the
value of the market for credit card transactions falls below merchants’ fixed acceptance
costs or because regulation significantly reduces the number of card providers. The
stronger is the regulatory intervention, the less likely it is that the market structure
will remain unchanged. Hence, while it may be hard to believe in the accuracy of
the far out of sample predictions, some perturbations around the factual equilibrium
may be very informative about welfare changes. It would be nice if the author can
report a sequence of equilibria with consumer and total welfare outcomes for a set of
steps reducing merchant fees gradually toward the cost of cash.
(d) If debit and credit cards are poor substitutes at the POS, how would a new payment
method help if it is going to have similar dedicated usages and will thus not attract
consumers who substitute away from services provided by debit or credit cards?

Minor comments/questions
3. Why is cash the cheapest payment method? Historically, this used to be true for small
value transactions. However, with the development of contactless features (e.g., tap-andgo) the cost of card transactions must have gone down. Relatedly, using data from only
signature cards, which are less convenient and costlier to use than contactless ones, may
lead to incorrect estimates of unobserved characteristics. If the data distinguishes between
contactless and signature cards, it would be nice to see different estimates of unobserved
quality parameters for these distinct types of cards. Otherwise, the author may want to
allow for some time variation in the unobserved product characteristics.
4. It is really hard to see how consistent the different data sources used by the author in
terms of years covered. It would help a lot if the author can report time period covered
by each of the data sets used in estimation.
5. How does competition between merchants in acceptance decisions work if the benefit of
accepting is the same for the first and for the last merchant accepting a given payment
method?
6. Why does χ not vary with consumer income and reward sensitivity? High-income consumers tend to have a wider consumption bundle and, hence, more opportunities to use
their debit and credit cards, while low-income consumers may not spend enough to rationalize adoption of both cards and hence are less likely to enjoy positive interaction effects.
Similarly, consumers with relatively high reward sensitivity should be more likely to gain
from the adoption of cards from different network to take advantage of a larger variety of
reward and loyalty programs.

References
Edelman, B. and Wright, J. (2015). Price coherence and excessive intermediation. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 130(3):1283–1328.
Huynh, K., Nicholls, G., and Shcherbakov, O. (2022). ”equilibrium in two-sided markets for
payments: Consumer awareness and the welfare cost of the interchange fee”. Staff Working
Paper 2022-15, Bank of Canada.
Rochet, J.-C. and Tirole, J. (2011). Must-take cards: merchant discounts and avoided costs.
Journal of the European Economic Association, 9(3):462–495.

