I appreciate the new revision and I have only minor comments to consider going forward.
In the previous version, I complained that not allowing consumers to hold both debit and credit
was restrictive and drove results. In this round, the paper allows consumers to hold both types of
cards but never substitute between them. The consumer that holds both types of card chooses
between them according to probability \pi and always treats cash as the second choice if the first
choice is not acceptable. I can see that this approach addresses the wording of my concern and
addresses descriptive evidence of households using both types of cards. But by ruling out
substitution, it is still quite unintuitive. I was not sure if the assumption was important for the
results. Merchants get a lift of \gamma from accepting credit cards (but not debit cards). Why is
that not enough to drive merchant adoption in the model, even if consumers can use debit as a
backup for credit? Does estimating under a “debit-as-backup” assumption lead to an
unreasonable distribution of \gamma? Along these lines, I think it would be helpful to describe
what is meant to be captured by the model of consumer substitution at the top of page 17. There
is a line at the end of the first paragraph, but it could be brought forward and expanded, at least a
little.
In the treatment effects estimation utilizing the grocer that adopted credit, obviously, the paper is
covering a lot of ground with a single event. If the grocer engaged in significant advertising
about the policy change, or perhaps even a promotion to introduce a new store-branded card, that
would be a problem for the paper. If you know that this did or did not happen, I think that is
worth discussing. Also, it’s worth acknowledging in the paper that we have very few such events
and so this one is standing in for many stores in many industries and contexts.
I am not sure I followed the discussion on page A-34 going to A-35. I think the key assumption
is that consumers do not observe their preference on debit versus credit at the time of adoption
(that is, at the bottom of A-33, V(M,W_i) is not a function of gamma_it because gamma_it are
integrated out). If the consumer knew she was going to have extreme bifurcated preferences like
described on A-35, the consumer would want to hold both cards.
I was happy with how the paper engaged with passthrough. Can the paper produce the
counterfactuals for the results in Table A.12?
1. Table 1 should indicate which data set it uses (there are many in this paper!) and the number
of observations.
2. In estimation Equation 2, there is no mention of the recent developments in estimating
treatment effects, such as Sun and Abraham. I am not sure any of them apply to triple-differences
with a continuous treatment variable, so perhaps there is nothing to implement. If so, please
acknowledge.
3. In Section III.C.2, how is “carrying” a card measured? I don’t think you would see it in
Homescan, which I think is what the section uses.
4. Why does Pw have a “w” superscript? Does the price index depend on a consumer’s wallet?
Or is it being distinguished from some other “P” variable?
5. In the displayed equation near the bottom of page 21, should y be indexed by i?
6. The acronym PCE is used in a few places but I don’t think ever spelled out.
7. The first sentence of Section A.3.1 is not right. On the same page, the last sentence of the

paragraph titled “Cash-only consumers” also needs revision.
8. The first sentence of the proof of Theorem 1 (page A-24) needs revision.
9. In Figure A.6, I could not distinguish between the two lines. Are they always perfectly
overlapping?
10. In the last paragraph of C.4.0, the paper should name the figure it is describing.
11. Using “et. al.” for author names in text is OK but it is helpful to reviewers to get the full list
of coauthors in the reference list.

