Deirdre N. McCloske.v

Second Edition

conomical
■

■

fl Ill

Second Edition

conom1ca

Deirdre N. McCloskeJ
University of Iowa
and
Erasmus University of Rotterdam

Long Grove, Illinois

For information about this book, contact:
Waveland Press, Inc.
4180 IL Route 83, Suite 101
Long Grove, IL 60047-9580
(847) 634-0081
info@waveland.com
www.waveland.com

Copyright© 2000 by Deirdre N. McCloskey
10-digit ISBN 1-57766-063-3
13-digit ISBN 978-1-57766-063-7

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be repro­
duced, stored in a retrieval system, or tra"f},smitted in any
form or by any means without permission in writing from
the publisher.
Printed in the United States of America
13

12 11

10 9 8

Books by Deirdre McCloskey

Economic Maturity and Entrepreneurial Decline:
British Iron and Steel, 1870-1913
Enterprise and Trade in Victorian Britain:
Essays in Historical Economics
The Applied Theory of Price, 2nd ed.
The Rhetoric of Economics, 2nd ed.
Econometric History
If You 're So Smart: The Narrative of Economic
Expertise
Knowledge and Persuasion in Economics
The Vices of Economists; The Virtues of the
Bourgeoisie
Crossing: A Memoir
How to Be an Economist* *Though Human

Contents
Preface ix
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

Why You Should Not Stop Reading Here 1
Writing Is the Economist's Trade 3
Writing Is Thinking 6
Rules Can Help, But Bad Rules Hurt 8
Be Thou Clear; But for Lord's Sake Have Fun,
Too 12
The Rules Are Factual Rather Than Logical 15
Classical Rhetoric Guides Even the Economical
Writer 17
Fluency Can Be Achieved by Grit 20
Write Early Rather Than Late 22
You Will Need Tools 25
Keep Your Spirits Up, Forge Ahead 29
Speak to an Audience of Human Beings 33
Avoid Boilerplate 35
Control Your Tone 39
Paragraphs Should Have Points 44
Make Tables, Graphs, and Displayed Equations
Readable 46
Footnotes Are Nests for Pedants 48
Make Your Writing Cohere 50
Use Your Ear 53
Write in Complete Sentences 55
Avoid Elegant Variation 56

..

Vll

21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31

Watch How Each Word Connects with Others 58
Watch Punctuation 61
The Order Around Switch Until It Good Sounds 65
Read, Out Loud 68
Use Verbs, Active Ones 70
Avoid Words That Bad Writers Love 72
Be Concrete 78
Be Plain 80
Avoid Cheap Typographical Tricks 83
Avoid This, That, These, Those 85
Above All, Look at Your Words 86
If You Didn't Stop Reading, Join the Flow 88
Works Cited 91
Index 95

...

Vlll

Preface
The implied reader of my little book is a student of econom­
ics or of related fields who needs to write. The book origi­
nated in a course for graduate economics students at the
University of Chicago in the 1970s. I thank the students for
their help. An earlier version, directed at young teachers of
economics, appeared under the present title in the April
1985 issue of Economic Inquiry, and something very like the
present edition appeared in book form at Macmillan of New
York in 1987 as The Writing of Economics, long out of print.
I thank a group of good writers who have improved the
argument by telling me where it was wrong or right:
Eleanor Birch, Thomas Borcherding, Ross Echert, Clifford
Geertz, Albert Hirschman, Sara Hirschman, Linda Kerber,
Charles Kindleberger, Meir Kohn, David Landes, much of
the McCloskey family (Laura, Helen, and Joanne), Joel
Mokyr, Erin Newton, Carol Rowe, much of the Solow family
(John, Barbara, and Robert), Richard Sutch, the late Donald
Sutherland, Steven Webb, A. Wick, and Barbara Yerkes.
Getting someone to criticize a piece of writing early is a good
practice, though students seldom have time to follow it. Bet­
ter to be criticized harshly by friends in private, and fix what
is wrong, than to be massacred in public. I've had the bene­
fit.
In publishing the first edition Anthony English, then
at Macmillan, was his usual tasteful and energetic self. Tony
was the last editor of the little book by Strunk and White,
and it flattered me to see my own libellus in the same form.
Cathy Hansen gave it a good student's-eye reading in the old
edition. My assistant Deborah Reese got me a word prolX

cessed version to work on. Marguerite Knoedel, who typed
the many drafts before the days of word processing, knows
that I'm not joking when I say that even passable writing
involves rewriting again and again and again. Hemingway
rewrote the last page of Farewell to Arms sixty times. Sixty.
In pencil. The John Simon Guggenheim Foundation, the
National Endowment for the Humanities, the Institute for
Advanced Study, and the University of Iowa gave me the
time.

X

Why You Should Not
Stop Reading Here
The man in the street loves his mistaken opinions about free
trade, and will not listen to professors of ecortomics. His
opinions are his own, after all, and free trade is "just a mat­
ter of opinion." Everyone is "entitled to his opinion in a free
country." Phooey to the professors.
But as a student of economics you have read the chap­
ter on comparative advantage in your Ee 1 text and you
know that the man in the street is wrong.It's like that with
writing. Most writers have at first the man in the street's
attitude toward what they write. They don't know the rules.
They won't look into professional advice on writing. They
never rewrite. They can't read the page they wrote yester­
day with a cold eye. They admire uncritically everything
they've written, favoring their mistakes as God-given and
personal. Just matters of opinion.
Now it's true that you can't change your character
traits, very much, and it's offensive for some louse to criti­
cize them:
Linus: What's this?
Lucy: This is something to help you be a better person next
year.... This is a list I made up of all your faults. [Exit]
Linus [reading, increasingly indignant]: Faults? You call
these faults? These aren't faults! These are character
traits!

Amateur writers suppose that writing is a character trait
instead of a skill. If someone says that it's clumsy to use "not
only ... but also" or that it's phony to use "prioritize" they
1

are liable to react the way they react to remarks about their
body shape. Hey, that's who I am; lay off, you louse.The pro­
fessionals, by contrast, such as poets and journalists and the
best writers of economics, have learned to take advantage of
criticism.
The first and the biggest truth about writing is that we
all-you, I, and Dave Barry-can use more criticism. We
would be a lot more professional if we took more of it.

2

Writing Is the
Economist's Trade
In a "Shoe" strip the uncle bird comes in the front door with
a briefcase overflowing with paper and says to the nephew
bird, "I'm exhausted, but I've got to work: I've got to get this
report out by tomorrow morning." Next panel: "I'll be up
until 3:00 writing it." Last panel, picturing the nephew with
a horrified look on his face: "You mean homework is for­
ever?!" Yes, dear, homework is forever. A lot of it is writing.
Non-economists have been complaining about eco­
nomic and other social scientific writing for quite a while
(Williamson 1947). Older economists mainly shrug off their
responsibility to teach the young to write, offering the
strange excuse that the young won't pay attention. (You'll
remember that your lack of attention didn't stop them from
explaining income and substitution effects in three different
ways.) Only a few economists have written about economic
writing. Walter Salant did his part in an essay published in
1969. J.K. Galbraith wrote a piece called "Writing, Typing
and Economics." He was using Hemingway's crack about a
bad writer: "That's not writing: that's typing." A lot of eco­
nomics isn't even very good typing.
The lack of interest in economical writing doesn't
come from a lack of importance. But no one tells the begin­
ner in a trade with a lot of writing how important it is to
learn the skill. The researchers at the Department of Agri­
culture care about writing; so do Federal Reserve banks; pri­
vate companies do a lot of business by writing. And of course
3

professors of economics must write. The big secret in eco­
nomics is that good writing pays well and bad writing pays
badly. Honest. Rotten writing causes more papers and
reports to fail than do rotten statistics or rotten research.
You have to be read to be listened to. Bad writing is not read,
even by professors or bosses paid to read it. Can you imagine
actually reading the worst term paper you've ever turned
in? Your sainted mother herself wouldn't.
Economics teaches things slightly off the point. The
courses don't tell you directly how to do economics-they
tell you about it, but not how to do it-and most programs
offer little in the way of on-the-job practice. Students are
taught minor details in statistics when the hard business of
quantitative thinking in economics is getting the data
straight; they are taught minor details in mathematics
when the hard business of mathematical economics is get­
ting economic ideas straight. (In fact they are often taught
mistaken details: that statistical significance, for example,
has anything to do with substantive significance; or that a
proof on a blackboard is the same thing as a proof in the
world [McCloskey 1998; McCloskey and Ziliak 1996]). In
most schools they are taught nothing about writing, when
the hard business of economic thinking is getting the words
straight. The master carpenter turns her back on the
apprentice, concealing the tricks of the trade, such as cut­
ting a board clean.
The reason for learning to cut it clean, I repeat, is that
the skill is used a lot. What economists do, and what people
educated in economics do even if they never see a demand
curve after their education, depends on writing, because
writing is the cheapest way to reach a big audience, espe­
cially in the age of the Internet, and because writing forces
4

the writer to think. An economically trained person is likely
to spend most of her working life writing papers, reports,
memoranda, proposals, columns, and letters. Economics
depends much more on writing (and on speaking, another
neglected art) than on the statistics and mathematics usu­
ally touted as the tools of the trade. Most of the economist's
skills are verbal. An economist should be embarrassed to do
such a large part of the craft unprofessionally. Shame on us.

5

Writing Is Thinking
The usual reply is, "That's just a matter of style: after all,
it's content that matters." Students will sometimes com­
plain about bad grades earned for writing badly, arguing
that they had the content right, or that they meant to say the
right thing (people who are complaining about grades speak
in italics).
Now the influence of mere style is greater than you
think. The history of ideas has many wide turns caused by
"mere" lucidity and elegance of expression. Galileo's Dia­
logo of 1632 persuaded people that the earth went around
the sun, but not because it was a Copernican tract (there
were others) or because it contained much new evidence (it
did not). It was persuasive because it was a masterpiece of
Italian prose. Poincare's good French and Einstein's good
German early in this century were no small contributors to
their influence on mathematics and physics. John Maynard
Keynes (rhymes with "brains") hypnotized three genera­
tions of economists and politicians with his graceful fluency
in English. Keynes is acknowledged as the best writer that
economics has had. (See, however, the hostile dissection of
the style of a passage from Keynes in Graves and Hodge
[1943 (1961), pp. 332-340]. It makes one wince, that our
best is so easy to fault.)
But the real problem is the premise that you can split
content from style. It's wrong. They are yolk and white in a
scrambled egg. Economically speaking, the production func­
tion for thinking cannot be written as the sum of two sub6

functions, one producing "results" and the other "writing
them up." The function is not separable. You do not learn
the details of an argument until writing it in detail, and in
writing the details you uncover flaws in the fundamentals.
Thinking requires detail: you can't add 21 and 27 if you get
all fuzzy about whether 2 plus 2 equals 4 or 5. You have to
know for sure. Good thinking is accurate, symmetrical, rel­
evant to the thoughts of the audience, concrete yet usefully
abstract, concise yet usefully full; above all it is self-critical
and honest. So too is good writing.
Good writers in economics write self-critically and
honestly, trying to say what they mean. They sometimes dis­
cover in the act of writing that what looked persuasive when
floating vaguely in the mind looks foolish when moored to
the page. Better, they discover truths they didn't know they
had. They refine their fuzzy notion of an obstacle to trade by
finding the right word to describe it; they see the other side
of a market by writing about the demand side with clarity.
Annie Dillard says in The Writing Life,
When you write, you lay out a line of words. The line of words
is a miner's pick, a woodcarver's gouge, a surgeon's probe.
You wield it, and it digs a path you follow. Soon you find your­
self deep in new territory.... The writing has changed, in
your hands, and in a twinkling, from an expression of your
notions to an epistemological tool. (Dillard 1989, p. 3)

Writing resembles mathematics. Mathematics is a language,
an instrument of communication. But so too language is a
mathematics, an instrument of thought.

7

Kules Can Help, But Bad Kules Hurt
Like mathematics, writing can be learned. It's an evasion to
talk of writing as a natural gift, a free lunch from the gods,
which some people have and some just don't. Although we
can't all become Mark Twains or George Orwells, anyone
can write better. In fact Twain and Orwell worked at
explaining how (Twain 1895; Orwell 1946).
Elementary writing can be learned like high school
algebra. On the simplest level neither is inborn. Only a few
people can prove important new theorems in mathematics,
about as few as can write regularly for the New Yorker. Yet
anyone can learn to solve a set of simultaneous equations,
just as anyone can learn to delet.e a quarter of the words
from a first draft. Like mathematics at the simplest level,
good writing at the simplest level follows rules.
There are scores of rulebooks on writing, most of them
pretty good (by the way, the computer programs that claim
to help you with writing are useless; maybe someday they
will get better, but right now they are terrible, written by
people who don't know how). You can find the good rule­
books in the writing section of any big bookstore. My three
favorites, from elementary to advanced, are William Strunk,
Jr. and E. B. White, The Elements of Style (1959 and later
editions); Robert Graves and Alan Hodge, The Reader Over

Your Shoulder: A Handbook for Writers of English Prose
(1943 and later editions); and Joseph M. Williams, Style:
Toward Clarity and Grace (1981; 5th ed. 1996). Not every­

one will get as much as I did from these three, but Strunk
8

and White is fundamental: you can't be any kind of profes­
sional writer if you haven't read and taken to heart its little
lessons. Other texts I know and admire are Richard A. Lan­
ham, Revising Prose (1979; 3rd ed. 1992) and his Revising
Business Prose (3rd ed. 1992); and Wayne Booth, Gregory
Colomb, and Joseph Williams, The Craft of Research (1995).
Some more advanced books are F. L. Lucas, Style (1955);
Jacques Barzun, Simple and Direct: A Rhetoric for Writers
(1976; revised ed. 1994); part III of Jacques Barzun and
Henry F. Graff, The Modern Researcher (1970); Paul R. Hal­
mos, pp. 19-48 in Norman E. Steenrod et al., How to Write
Mathematics (1973; 2nd ed. 1981); Sir Ernest Gowers, The
Complete Plain Words (1962 and subsequent editions);
Howard S. Becker, Writing for Social Scientists ( 1986); Wil­
liam E. Blundell, The Art and Craft of Feature Writing
(1980, by a writer for the Wall Street Journal); Francis-Noel
Thomas and Mark Turner, Clear· and Simple as the Truth:
Writing Classic Prose (1994); and anything by Annie Dil­
lard, such as The Writing Life (1989).
The rules I give here, many of them the same as the
other books give, will be depressing at first, because of their
great number ("Number 613: Query any sentence with
more than two adjectives in it") and their vagueness ("Be
clear"-but, you ask, how?). What you are really trying to
learn is like good sewing or carpentry, watching what you're
doing and giving it some thought. If you resolve right now to
put away your amateur attitude toward writing and to start
watching and thinking, you'll do fine in the end. Meanwhile,
just like the first steps in sewing or carpentry, there are
rules and rules and more rules.
Don't believe everyone, though, who sets up as a
teacher of the rules. The first rule is that many of the rules
9

we learned in Miss Jones' class in the eighth grade are
wrong. Sometimes of course Miss Jones had a point. For
example, dangling out on a limb alone, she justly castigated
participles badly placed in a sentence. Her strictures against
"I" make no sense if they merely result in replacing "I" with
"we," but do make sense if you see that when you're talking
about "I" (or "we") you're not talking about the subject.Yet
in other ways her list of rules and the folk wisdom that rein­
forced it have done damage.
"Never repeat the same word or phrase within three
lines, " said Miss Jones, and because the rule fit splendidly
with our budding verbosity at age 13 we adopted it as the
habit of a lifetime. Now we can't mention the "consumer" in
one line without an itch to call it the "household" in the next
and the "agent" in the next. Our readers slip into a fog
known in the writing trade as "elegant variation."
"Never write 'I'," wrote she, and we (and you and I)
have drowned in "we'' ever since, a "we'' less suited to mere
economists than to kings, editors, and people with tape­
worms.
"Don't be common; emulate James Fenimore Cooper;
writing well is writing swell," said she, praising Harry
Whimple and his fancy talk-and in later life we struggled
to attain a splendidly dignified bureaucratese.
Miss Jones ruled against our urge to freely split infin­
itives. H. W. Fowler, who wrote in 1926 an amusing book on
the unpromising subject of Modern English Usage, knew
how to handle her (1926 [1965], article "Split Infinitives"):
"Those who neither know nor care [what a split infinitive is]
are the vast majority, and are a happy folk, to be envied by
most. . . . 'To really understand' comes readier to their lips
and pens than 'really to understand'; they see no reason

10

why they should not say it (small blame to them, seeing that
reasons are not their critics' strong point) . "
Miss Jones filled us with guilt about using a preposi­
tion to end a sentence with. Winston Churchill, a politician
of note who wrote English well, knew how to handle her and
the editor who meddled with his preposition-ended sen­
tence. He wrote in the margin of his manuscript corrected
by a student of Miss Jones, "This is the sort of impertinence
up with which I will not put. "
_ Worst of all, Miss Jones fastened onto our impression­
able minds the terrible, iterative rule of Jonesian arrange­
ment: "Say what you're going to say; say it; say that you've
said it. " The Jonesian rule has nearly ruined economic
prose. Papers in economics consist mostly of summary, out­
line, anticipation, announcement, redundancy, and review.
They never get to the point.

11

Be Thou Clear; But for Lord's Sake
Have Fun, Too
The one genuine rule, a golden one, is Be Clear. A Roman
professor of writing and speaking put it this way: "There­
fore one ought to take care to write not merely so that the
reader can understand but so that he cannot possibly mis­
understand" (Quintilian, Book VIII, ii, 24). Clarity is a social
matter, not something to be decided unilaterally by the
writer. The reader like the consumer is sovereign. If the

reader thinks what you write is unclear, then it is, by defini­
tion. Quit arguing. Karl Popper, a philosopher with a good

style a nd a corresponding ly wide influence, wrote : " I
learned never to defend anything I had written against the
accusation that it is not clear enough. If a conscientious
reader finds a passage unclear, it has to be re-written. . . . I
write, as it were, with somebody constantly looking over my
shoulder and constantly pointing out to me passages that
are not clear" (p. 83) .
Clarity is a matter of speed directed at the point. Bad
writing stops you with a puzzle in every other sentence. It
sends you off in irrelevant directions. It distracts you from
the point, provoking irritated questions about what the sub­
ject is now, what the connection might be with the subject a
moment ago, and why the words differ. You are always losing
your way. Bad writing makes slow reading. The practice of
Graves and Hodge in compiling the bad examples for their
principles of clear and graceful expression was "to glance at
every book or paper we found lying about and, whenever our

12

reading pace was checked by some difficulty of expression,
to note the cause" (p. 127). (Their own sentence, inciden­
tally, illustrates one rule of reading pace they could have fol­
lowed better: Do Not Overuse Commas. )
In most writing the reader is in trouble more than half
the time. You can see this by watching your own troubles.
Notice in the present long and involved sentence, since
there is a lot of clumsy intrusion of brand new stuff and the
jumps in elevation of lingo, how no one could follow it, at
least on first reading without having to go over it two, three
times, because it is ungrammatical, which means not only
that it breaks a Miss Jones Rule but also that it confuses you
and anyone else, a reader, who happens to be reading, by vio­
lating your expectations, and that it has too much in it any­
way, with no pleasing arrangement, which would make
sense of it. You stumble and yawn and wander when you
read such stuff.
Reading your own writing cold, a week after drafting
it, will show you places where even you cannot follow the
sense with ease. Knock such places into shape. If the readers
have too much trouble they give up. Lack of clarity is selfish
and confusing. The writer is wasting your time. Up with this
you need not put.
Telling someone who is not already an accomplished
writer to "Be Clear, " though, is not a lot of help. It has been
said that "It is as hard to write well as to be good." In the
abstract the golden rule of writing clearly helps about as
much as the golden rule of other doings, of which it is a cor­
ollary. ''All things whatsoever ye would that men should do
to you, do ye even so to them. " Well, sure, yes, all right; but
how?
13

And wait a minute. All this talk of "rules"-which the
rest of the book is going to continue-sounds awfully grim.
It is, and necessarily so. But once you learn a few of the rules
and start applying them you'11 start to be able to play the
Game of Writing. It's not just grim following of rules, a
death march to the Department of English. It's great fun to
get a sentence just right, in the same way that it's fun to get
a dish you're cooking just right or a double play in softball
just right. The psychologist Mihaly Csiksz entmihalyi
( "CHICK-sent-mee-high-ee") has discovered that happiness
is not a six-pack and a sport utility vehicle but what he calls
"flow, " which occurs "when a person's skills are fully
involved in overcoming a challenge that is just about man­
ageable" ( 1997, p. 30). Flow makes work into play and play
into work. The rhetorician Richard Lanham argues that the
best way to teach yourself writing is to indulge in a certain
amount of clowning in prose. You take words seriously by
playing with them, overcoming an artistic challenge that is
just about manageable.
Back to the rules-though I hope you see from my
style that I don't think life should be mainly rule driven.
Learn the rules in order to have fun. To have a fulfilled life
you want to achieve flow. Believe me, skillful writing is one
way.

14

The Kules Are Factual
Rather Than Logical
The rules come from observation. In the best writing, you 40
not stumble. It's no trick to spot a bad sentence and to see
what went wrong. Just read. You feel it, like rain or sun­
shine. You know that George Orwell wrote well, that Mary
McCarthy doesn't take many false steps, that you seldom
have difficulty understanding what Tom Wolfe is talking
about. Dr. Johnson said two centuries ago: He who would
acquire a good style should devote his days and nights to the
study of Joseph Addison. Well, likewise: Orwell, McCarthy,
and Wolfe.
In recent economics the list would include Akerlof,
Arrow, Boulding, Bronfenbrenner, Buchanan, Caves, East­
erlin, Fogel, Frank, Friedman, Haberler, Harberger, Heil­
broner, Hirschman, Hughes, Galbraith, Gerschenkron,
Griliches, Harry Johnson, Keynes, Kindleberger, Lebergott,
Leijonhufvud, Olson, Robertson, Joan Robinson, Rostow,
Schelling, Schumpeter, Theodore Schultz, Solow, Stigler,
Tobin, Tullock, and Yeager. Pay attention to how they write:
this is as good as it gets. The diminishing returns in the list
are sharp. Even economists who take some pains with their
style will overuse "we, " the passive voice, and fancy talk
from Latin and Greek ( "We perceive that equilibrium is
achieved by a process of successive approximations").
You can't define good style without a list of good writ­
ers.- (A list compiled statistically by the economist Arthur
Diamond showed that the best writer in economics was,

15

uh, . . . me, Deirdre McCloskey. Depressing news. I know
how badly I write. If I'm the best . . . ). Good style is what
good writers do. Double negatives, for example, aren't
"illogical" (modern French and ancient Greek have them);
they are social mistakes, at least right now. If Orwell and his
kind start using "I ain't no fool, " no amount of schoolmaster
logic can stand in the way of its imitation. In matters of taste
the only standard is the practice of good people. Further­
more, everything from the standard of proof in number the­
ory to the standard of skill in baton twirling is a matter of
taste. You find out who is good by comparing good with bad.
A reader grades writers by stylistic competence. The
violation of the rules of clarity and grace sends a signal of
incompetence. If you start sentences habitually with "How­
ever" the reader will discover that you are an incompetent
writer in other ways, too. Because the violations signal
incompetence they are correlated with each other. It's a
good bet that a writer who doesn't know how to express par­
allel ideas in parallel form, and doesn't care, will also not
know how to avoid excessive summarization and anticipa­
tion. It's about as good a bet that she will not know how to
think, and will not care.

16

Classical Rhetoric Guides Even the
Economical Writer
Essays are made from bunches of paragraphs, which are
made from bunches of sentences, which are made from
bunches of words. Before you start an essay choose a subject
that meets the assignment yet stirs something in your soul
(you cannot work on a subject unless you love it or hate it;
you should therefore do your economic history on the fash­
ion industry and your industrial organization on advertis­
ing). The rules about whole essays or paragraphs are most
useful at the stage of first composition; the rules about sen­
tences and words at the stage of final revision. Some rules
apply everywhere: it is good to be brief in the whole essay
and in the single word, during the midnight fever of compo­
sition and the morning chill of revision. Brevity is the soul
of clarity, too. Yet the rules of writing can be stuffed if neces­
sary into boxes by diminishing size from essay to word.
What is needed for this is an economic rhetoric. I do
not mean by "rhetoric" a frill, or a device for lying-the pol­
itician's "heated rhetoric" at a news conference or the pro­
fessor's "bad rhetoric" when arguing a weak case. I mean
the whole art of argument, which is its classical and correct
meaning. It is the art, as Wayne Booth put it ( 1974, p. 59),
"of discovering warrantable beliefs and improving those
beliefs in shared discourse. "
The three important parts of classical rhetoric were
invention, arrangement, and style. Invention, the framing
of arguments worth listening to, is the business of economic
17

theory and of empirical economics. Theory and empirical
economics have been hurt by an official methodology which
an awareness of rhetoric can heal (McCloskey 1998). It helps
to see, for instance, that some economic arguments are a
series of analogies. Saying that the market for automobiles
is "just like" a diagram of demand and supply is, when you
think about it, bizarre. Not false: bizarre. It is also bizarre to
compare a beloved to a summer's day, but Shakespeare did
it, exploring its persuasiveness. Economic models are eco­
nomic poetry.
The economic poems make remarks about each other,
as poems do. Once you have solved one problem by stating it
as an analogy you can use the problem as an analogy for oth­
ers. Suppose you come to understand that a waitress who
customarily gets tips is not necessarily better off because of
the custom: without tipping she would have to get a higher
salary to retain her and others in the industry. The analogy
here is of waitresses to business tycoons or gold dealers.
Once you have grasped the primary analogy you can see oth­
ers later as analogies to it. Someone says, "Safety regula­
tions help coal miners. " You think: '½h, hah! That's just the
Tipped Waitress Problem, " and then say out loud, astonish­
ing your audience with your economic brilliance, "No, with­
out the safety regulations they would be paid more: so only
the miners who value health highly compared to money are
better off. " You have used analogy, part of the rhetoric of
economics. It's the main way that economists approach the
getting of ideas.
Arrangement, too, is a part of economic rhetoric not
much examined. A good deal of economic prose implies that
the only proper arrangement of an empirical essay is intro­
duction, outline of the rest of the paper, theory, (linear)
18

model, results, suggestions for future research (since noth­
ing ever works), and ( again) summary. One rarely sees
experiments with alternative arrangements, such as dia­
logues or reports on the actual sequence of the author's dis­
covery. At any rate one does not see them in print. When
economists talk among themselves, in the seminar room or
hallway, the dialogue is the whole point, usually introduced
by a report in sequence of "how I actually came to this sub­
ject. " Economists might try learning good arrangement
from their own behavior.
An official arrangement has spread to the social sci­
ences from physics and biology. It is supposed to make social
sciences more scientific to have a section entitled "Data" or
"Results. " The official rhetoric is a poor one. It does not tell
what needs to be known-which experiments failed, what
mathematics proved fruitless, why exactly the questions
were asked in the way they were (see Medawar, 1964). It's
better to make your own outline, one that fits your argu­
ment.

19

Fluency can He Achieved
by Grit
The third branch of classical rhetoric, style, is easier to
teach. It begins with mere fluency, getting the stuff down on
paper. And it ends with revising again and again, until
you've removed all the traps and ugliness.
You will have done some research (this is known as
"thinking " and "reading" and "calculating ") and are sitting
down to write. Sitting down to write can be a problem, for it
is then that your subconscious, which is dismayed by the
anxiety of filling up blank pieces of paper, suggests that it
would be ever so much more fun to do the dishes or to go get
the mail. Sneak up on it and surprise it with the ancient rec­
ipe for success in intellectual pursuits: locate chair; apply
rear end to it; locate writing implement; use it. You may
wish to increase the element of surprise by writing standing
at a tall desk, as my colleague Gary Fethke does. Once at the
desk, though, you will find your subconscious drawing on
various reserves of strength to persuade you to stop: fear,
boredom, the impulse to track down that trivial point by
adjourning to the library. Time to go see Mary or John. Time
to watch the basketball game. Time to get some fresh air.
Don't. Resist. It's time to write.
One of these distractions is taste. The trouble with
developing good taste in writing, which is the point of study­
ing books like this one, is that you begin to find your stuff
distasteful. This creates doubt. Waves of doubt-the convic­
tion that everything you 've done so far is rubbish-will
20

wash over you from time to time. The only help is a cheerful
faith that more work will raise even this rubbish up to your
newly acquired standards. Once achieved, you can reraise
the standards and acquire better doubt at a level of still bet­
ter taste. Buck up. Irrational cheerfulness is hard to teach
but good to have for any work.

21

Write Early Rather Than Late
The teachable trick is getting a first draft. Don't wait until
the research is done to begin writing because writing, to
repeat, is a way of thinking. Be writing all the time, working
on a page or two here, a section there. Research is writing.
As a real student you will have notes, bits of prose to be
placed in the mosaic. It often helps to give each note a title
stating its gist, or at least a key word. Though any writing
surface from clay tablet to computer screen can hold the
notes, white 4" x 6" cards lined on one side are best when
writing with a pen; with a word processor the best plan is
just to spill out the notes as paragraphs, then print them
out, cut them up with scissors, finding the best arrange­
ment. Use one idea per card or per paragraph, even if the
idea is only a single line. It's a mistake to economize by
cramming several ideas into one space. Paper is cheap.
Manila folders are nice. In 1959 the American sociologist C. Wright Mills wrote an exhilarating essay, "On Intel­
lectual Craftsmanship," in which he called the whole set of
cards, folders, and so forth The File (which in computer talk
has turned out to be virtually the same idea). "You must set
up a file, which is, I suppose, a sociologist's way of saying:
Keep a journal. Many creative writers keep journals; the
sociologist's [and economist's] need for systematic reflection
demands it" (p. 196). The file should become thick and rich,
dumped out on the floor occasionally (or printed out and cut
up) and rearranged.

22

Read through the file ( which is invention) trying to see
an outline in it (which is arrangement) . The first outline will
be broad. Allocate the cards or strips of printed and cut up
paper to related stacks. Add notes reminding you of transi­
tions and new ideas that occur to you as you ponder the file.
Arrangement is like good statistical work, searching the
data for patterns . It's like good dramatic work, too, search­
ing the audience for response. Your arrangement should be
artful. Make it interesting.
Now set aside the broad outline, keeping it steadily in
mind. You need it as a goal to give the writing direction. You
can change it, and should do so as the essay takes shape.
Pick a little part of the outline to write about today. It need
not be the beginning, though it' s sometimes difficult to
write first drafts any other way. The paper should be a story
because readers normally read from beginning to end. Use
the mad, creative file that is your brain. You need a certain
intensity for all this. Writing cannot be done entirely as a
routine, like peeling potatoes.
Write another outline if you get stuck (never stop for
outlining if you 're not stuck), a narrower one about the
points you are going to write in the next few sentences or
paragraphs, checking off the points as you write. Arrange­
ment is a matter of finding good outlines, from the level of
the book down to the level of the paragraph. The points in
all outlines from broad to narrow should be substantive, not
formal: not "Introduction" or " Concluding Paragraph" but
"Economists pay no attention to the sexual division of
labor" and " Housework should be included in national
income"; or in a telegraphic style, "div. lab. " and "housewk
& GDP." Keep a piece of paper at hand to try out turns of
phrase or to note ideas that occur in advance of their use.
23

When you get an inspiration, do not depend on your memory
to keep it. A phrase or word will jog it. Don't let the moment
pass.

24

You Will Need Tools
You will need an outline sitting on your desk, covered with
notes for revision, some scratch paper for trying out things,
and your File up on your screen. Don't worry about being
neat: clean up in a dull moment.
You will need certain other bits of capital in abun­
dance. Word processors are so cheap and so much easier
than the old technology that you should get one if you don't
have one. You should find pleasure in exercising the tools of
writing. An expensive and well balanced fountain pen is old­
fashioned, but fun to use when the mood strikes. Indulge
yourself. On the other hand, try not to become compulsive
about equipment and procedures and surroundings. Ernest
Hemingway used to sharpen forty pencils with a jackknife
before beginning to write. So he didn't write much, though
a lot of it was good. Be more flexible than he was if you can
manage it. Look on yourself as an honest-to-goodness pro­
fessional writer (which is what you are) who can do any job
on command anywhere with any equipment w hatever,
Ernie Pyle pecking out dispatches on a portable typewriter
from a foxhole on the Italian front in 1944.
Most people compose these days at a computer screen,
some dictate into a tape recorder, and some old fogies whom
I love dearly still write out everything in longhand on big
yellow legal pads. A new medium will change your style, per­
haps for the better. Switching from medium to medium is
worth trying, because each medium suggests new arrange­
ments. Here 's an odd but valuable tip: if you change the

25

typeface on your draft you will see it in a new light. As Rich­
ard Lanham, a master of these things, advised, "toggle. "
The next most important tool is a dictionary. Every
place you read or write should have its own dictionary. Do
not use the crummy little paperback dictionaries: they do
not lie flat and therefore require two hands to use. Use the
big college dictionaries. Buy them secondhand for a few
bucks and then scatter them around your apartment (being
up-to-date is unimportant in a dictionary except for some
details of spelling, like hyphenation). A good one is Webster's
New World Dictionary of the American Language. It's hand­
somely produced, does a good job at word origins, notes
Americanisms (handy when writing to non-Americans) ,
gives easy-to-follow pronunciation guides (handy when
speaking), and distinguishes levels of usage. Only if your
computer software has an exceptionally good dictionary and
you can access it quicker than you can reach over and look
up the word can you do without the book.
A dictionary is more than a spelling list. Pause to read
the definitions and the word origins. Part of the purpose
again is to write well in the sense of not making embarrass­
ing mistakes in usage. If you think "disinterested" means
the same thing as "uninterested, " for instance, you need to
get acquainted with a dictionary and to start reading good
writing with it at hand. Yet beyond what is meet and proper
(look up "meet, " noting that in this sense it is related to
"medical" ), wordlore will make you grow as a wordsmith.
Learn to like words and to inquire about their backgrounds.
It's a useful friendship, a joy of life.
English spelling would drive anybody nuts. The play­
wright George Bernard Shaw noted once that you could
spell the word "fish" in English as "ghoti" (gh as in enough,
26

o as in women, and ti as in nation). It's astonishing that any­
one learns to spell according to Webster. In the sixteenth
century nobody much cared, and Shakespeare (Shakspere,
Shakespere) spelt 'em as hee plees 'd. But nowadays you
must spell according to Webster or you look like a careless
dolt. It's stupid and unfair but that's the way things are.
Students chronically misspell a few words, such as "receive"
(remember: i before e except after c; but what about "lei­
sure ' " "either.' '' "weird ' " or for that matter " Deirdre "?)
. '•
" separate " ( pronounce the verb form carefully-"sep aRATE"-and you'll remember it) ; schedule (which I could
not spell until graduate school) ; whether (as against rain
and shine) ; their (as against over there or where they're) .
The spellchecker is a great innovation: for Lord's sake
use it. Never turn in anything to anyone, and certainly not
to a teacher or boss whose opinion matters if you haven't
spellchecked. (Though remember that you have to choose
"their" and "there " and "they're" for yourself; and hun­
dreds of other choices; no substitute for giving the paper
that last, slow rereading.)
A thesaurus (Greek: "treasure" ) shows you the precise
word within a more or less fuzzy region of the language. Use
a big one, not the pocket versions. Unfortunately the so­
called "thesaurus" available with most word processing pro­
grams is almost useless, because the choices are too small.
The best thesaurus is Roget 's International Thesaurus. I
favor the old 3rd edition over later ones, which for some rea­
son they decided to spoil. "Proper words in proper places,
make the true definition of a style, " said Jonathan Swift (the
comma in the odd place is an eighteenth-century weird­
ness).
27

Dictionaries of quotations (Bartlett's, Oxford, Pen­
guin) are worth having-not to extract ornamental re­
marks in the manner of the speaker at the Kiwanis Club
(avoid quotation books organized by topic: you want them
by author), but to find the precise words within a more or
less fuzzy memory: What exactly did Swift say, weird comma
and all?
It's instructive to keep a personal book of quotations,
containing economic ideas you think are expressed well. It's
called a "commonplace book, " not because it's cheesy but
because in classical rhetoric the commonly shared materials
of invention were called loci communes, literally "the com­
mon places," or "usual topics," "koinoi topoi" in Greek. Well
kept, such a book can be the writer's journal of which Mills
spoke. Simon James published his for economics, as A Dic­
tionary of Economic Quotations ( 1984), mainly British,
which contains much encouraging evidence that British
economists know how to turn a phrase.

28

10

Keep Your Spirits Up,
Forge Ahead
Now start writing. Here I must become less helpful, not
because I have been instructed to hold back the secrets of
the trade but because creativity is scarce. Where exactly the
next sentence comes from is not obvious. If it were obvious
then novels and economics papers could be written by
machine.
If you can't think of anything to say, you might well
read more, calculate more, and in general research more.
Most research, however, turns out to be irrelevant to the
paper you finally write, which is another reason to mix writ­
ing with the researching. The writing forces you to ask ques­
tions about the facts that are strictly relevant. The next
sentence will sometimes reveal that you didn't do all the
right research. The guiding question in research (research is
not the subject here, but I'm not charging extra) is So What?
Answer that question in every sentence, and you will
become a great scholar, or a millionaire; answer it once or
twice in a ten-page paper, and you'll write a good one.
If after all this, though, you still have nothing to say,
then perhaps your mind is poorly stocked with ideas in gen­
eral. The solution is straightforward. Educate yourself. That
is, live a life of wide experience, and spend big chunks of it
reading the best our civilization has to offer. Begin tonight.
It's not too late to join the great conversation:
As civilized human beings, we are the inheritors, neither of
an inquiry about ourselves and the world, nor of an accumu-

29

lating body of information, but of a conversation begun in the
primeval forest and extended and made more articulate in the
course of centuries . . . . Education, properly speaking, is an
initiation . . . in which we acquire the intellectual and moral
habits appropriate to conversation. (Oakeshott 1933, pp.
198-199)

Anyway, say it. Saying it out loud will help. If people
wrote more the way they spoke, their writing would have
more vigor (if they spoke more the way they wrote their
speaking would have more precision) . Writing expresses
personality, as does the speaking voice: it is said that to write
well you need merely to make yourself good and then write
naturally. We are good when speaking to Mom or to a friend,
and we write well to them.
You hear a sentence when you read it out loud. It's a
good rule not to write anything you would be embarrassed
to say to the intended audience. In tutorials at Oxford and
Cambridge you have to read your writing out loud, and are
embarrassed if it's stupid. That's why British people of a
certain class and generation did not write stupidities. Don't
write entirely silently, or you will write entirely stiffly. Good
modern prose has the rhythms of actual speech-intelligent
and honest actual speech, not the empty chatter of the soph­
omore trying to make it at the fraternity party or the waf­
fling obscurity of the Labor Department bureaucrat trying
to tell a lie about black teenage unemployment. We exagger­
ate the power of words to conceal a shameful intent. Gener- ­
ally the words expose it.
Regard the outline as an aid, not a master. When you
get stuck, as you will, look at the outline, revise it, reread
what you have written, reread the last bit out loud, talk to
yourself about where it is going, imagine explaining it to a
30

friend, try to imitate some way of speaking that Dennis or
Maynard had, write a sentence parallel to the one just writ­
ten, fill out the idea.
Don't panic if the words don't come easily. Try chang­
ing the surroundings. Move to the library, sharpen a pencil,
visit the fridge, block out noise with earmuffs, put classical
music in your stereo (Bach is best for thinking; I use Mozart;
there's doubt concerning rap). Then get back to work. Don't
expect to write easily all the time. Nobody does. Writing, like
any form of thinking, flares and fizzles like a candle. Don't
break off when on a burn. Don't let anyone entice you into
watching a movie on TV; tell Jane to go away; resist break­
ing for a snack. Be selfish about your little candle of cre­
ation.
Keep the finished manuscript in some form handy for
rereading and revising. This is not a problem with word pro­
cessing, but you'll want to see the thing in hard copy, too. A
loose-leaf ringbinder is good because it can be added to eas­
ily, is hard to misplace even on a crowded desk, and can be
studied and revised while lying in bed.
When dull, and especially when starting a session,
reread a chunk of the draft, pencil in hand, to insert, amend,
revise, correct, cancel, delete, and improve. On a computer,
scroll up a little and read what you've done as though you
were a first-time reader, noting where your reading pace is
checked by some difficulty of expression.
At the end of a session, or at any substantial break,
always write down your thoughts, however vague, on what
will come next. This is a very good tip. Don't get up without
doing it, even to answer nature's call. Write or type the notes
directly onto the end of the text, where they can be looked at
and crossed off as used. A few scraps will do, and will save

31

half an hour of warming up when you start again. Jean
Piaget, a titan of psychology-not much of a stylist if one
can judge from the English translations, but the matter here
is fluency, not grace-remarked once ( 1980, p. 1), "It's bet­
ter to stop in the middle of the sentence. Then you don't
waste time starting up. " Paul Halmos urged the mathemat­
ical writer to plan the next session at the end of the present
one ( 1973, p. 28). After a session of writing, the ideas not yet
used stand ready in the mind. Get them onto that ideal stor­
age medium, the computer file.

32

11

Speak to an Audience
of Human Beings
Style, to repeat, is rewriting, and rewriting can be learned in
rules. Rewriting can be tiresome. The myth of the free lunch
to the contrary, good or even adequate writing is easy for few
writers, and some of the best writers work at it the hardest,
to make less work for the reader. Hemingway said, "Easy
writing makes hard reading. " Balzac rewrote his novels
from printer's proofs as often as 27 times, bankrupting him­
self with the expense (Lucas, p . 270). Virginia Woolf rewrote
parts of The Waves twenty times. Writing really well takes
as much devotion as playing an instrument really well. The
great violinist Giardini was asked how long it took him to
learn how to play: "Twelve hours a day for twenty years"
(Lucas, p. 271). Yet in truth the practice hours are not as
stressful as the performances. Once you are equipped with a
technique for doing it well, much of the rewriting is pleasant
and not excessively hard. Rewriting for style does not have
the anxiety of invention and arrangement-that you will
not be able to produce anything at all.
Look your audience directly in the eyes . Be honest
with them . Ask who they are, aim the draft toward them,
and keep hauling yourself back to facing them in revisions.
Choose a reader and stick with her. Changing your implied
reader is in an economic sense inefficient. There is no point
in telling your reader in a paper on the oil industry that oil
is a black, burnable fluid, then turning to an exposition that
assumes the reader understands supply and demand curves.

33

If you've started with a pre-schooler for an implied reader
you have to keep her around. Similarly, an article using the
translog production function wastes motion if it rederives
the elementary properties of a Cobb-Douglas production
function. No one who has gotten so far into such an article
will be innocent of Cobb-Douglas. The writing mixes up two
mutually exclusive audiences.
Some find it best to choose an Implied Reader of imag­
ination, an ideal economist; others find it best to choose a
real person, such as Richard Sutch or good old Professor
Smith or the friend down the hall. It is healthy discipline to
be haunted by people with high standards (but with some
sympathy for the enterprise) looking over your shoulder in
imagination. It keeps the prose steady at one level of diffi­
culty to imagine one master spirit. "How would Sutch see
this?" If it embarrasses you, imagining how Sutch would
read it, the stuff is embarrassing: fix it.

34

12

Avoid Boilerplate
Your writing must be interesting. This sounds harshly diffi­
cult. Few of us are great wits, and we know we aren't. But
you can avoid some dullnesses by rule. Choosing oneself as
the audience tends to dullness, since most of us admire
uncritically even dull products of our own brains. A reason­
ably correct recitation o'f the history of prices and interest
rates over the past ten years may strike its author as a
remarkable intellectual achievement, filled with drama and
novelty. But Richard Sutch, who knows it, or good old Pro­
fessor Smith, who lived it, or the colleague down the hall
who couldn't care less about it, probably don't agree. Spare
them. Restatements of the well known bore the readers;
routine mathematical passages bore the readers; excessive
introduction and summarization bore the readers. Get to
the point that some skeptical but serious reader cares about
and stick to it.
Therefore, avoid boilerplate. Boilerplate in prose is all
that is prefabricated and predictable. It's common in eco­
nomic prose. Excessive introduction and summarizing is
boilerplate; redoing for a large number of repetitive cases
what can be done just as well with a single well-chosen one
is boilerplate. The academic pose inspires boilerplate. Little
is getting accomplished with econometric chatter copied out
of the textbook, rederivations of the necessary conditions for
consumer equilibrium, and repetition of hackneyed formu­
lations of a theory.
35

Impenetrable theoretical utterances have prestige in
economics. That's sad, because no scientific advance can be
expected from such games on a blackboard. A young writer
of economics will sacrifice any amount of relevance and clar­
ity to show that she can play the game. The result is filigreed
boilerplate. The economist will write about the complete­
ness of arbitrage in this way: "Consider two cities, A and B,
trading an asset, X. If the prices ofX are the same in market
A and in market B, then arbitrage may be said to be com­
plete. " The clear way does not draw attention to its "theo­
retical" character at all: "New York and London in 1870
both had markets for Union Pacific bonds. The question is,
did the bonds sell for the same in both places?"
Never start a paper with that all-purpose filler for the
bankrupt imagination, "This paper. . . . " Describing the art
of writing book reviews, Jacques Barzun and Henry Graff
note (p. 272) that "the opening statement takes the reader
from where he presumably stands in point of knowledge and
brings him to the book under review" (p. 272). In journalism
it 's called the "hook. " A paper showing that monopoly
greatly reduces income might best start: "Every economist
knows by now that monopoly does not much reduce income
[which is where he presumably stands in point of knowl­
edge] . Every economist appears to be mistaken [thus bring­
ing him to the matter under review] . " It bores the reader to
begin "This paper discusses the evidence for a large effect of
monopoly on income." The reader's impulse, fully justified
by the tiresome stuff to follow, is to give up.
Another piece of boilerplate, attached to the early
parts of most student papers, is "background, " a polite word
for padding, the material you collected that you later discov­
ered was beside the point. It seems a shame not to use it, you
36

say; and after all it gives the thing weight. Resist. If you have
read a lot and if you have been thinking through the ques­
tion you began with, asking and answering one question
after another, you will have plenty to say. If you haven't read
a lot and did not think through the questions you are asking,
you will have nothing to say. No one will be fooled: remem­
ber that professors and bosses are experts in detecting lack
of effort and lack of success. You might as well spare a tree.
Still another piece of boilerplate, and one which kills
the momentum of most papers in economics on the second
page, is the table-of-contents paragraph: "The outline of this
paper is as follows. " Don't, please, please, for God's sake,
don't. Nine out of ten readers skip to the substance, if they
can find it. The few who pause on the paragraph are wasting
their time. They can't understand the paragraph until, like
the author, they have read the paper, at which point they
don't need it. Usually the table-of-contents paragraph has
been written with no particular audience in mind, least of all
the audience of first-time readers of the paper. Even when
done well it lacks a purpose. You will practically never see it
in good writing, unless inserted by an editor who doesn't
know good writing. Weak writers defend it as a "roadmap. "
They got the idea from Miss Jones: "Tell the reader what
you're going to say. Say it. Say that you've said it. " It's
exceptio11:ally bad advice, and the person who made up this
memorable phrasing of it is burning right now in Hell.
Therefore, avoid overtures, and do not give elaborate
summaries of what you have said. Never repeat without
apologizing for it ("as I said earlier" ; or merely "again").
Unless you apologize the reader thinks you have not noticed
the repetition, and will suspect that you have not thought
through the organization. She'll be right. Remember that
37

the paper that took you days or a week to write will be read
in about half an hour. You must read the paper yourself in
this rapid way to get the experience the reader will have, and
to make the experience good.
The writer who wishes to be readable does not clot his
prose with traffic directions. He thinks hard about the
arrangement. Add headings afterwards if you wish, espe­
cially ones with declarative sentences advancing the argu­
ment, like the ones used here. Your prose, however, should
read well and clearly without the headings.

38

13
Control Your Tone
The tone of the writing and much of its clarity depends on
choosing and then keeping an appropriate implied author,
the character you pretend to be while writing: the Enthusi­
astic Student, the Earnest Scientist, the Reasonable and
Modest Journeyman, the Genius, the Math Jock, the Profes­
sor, the Breezy Journalist. Look at a piece of economics and
ask what Implied Author it has in mind. The successful
piece will have an author the reader can tolerate. Writing is
a little drama in which the writer chooses the roles. You can­
not abstain as a writer from making a choice. You can't just
"be yourself, " though you will probably do a more persua­
sive job if the implied author in your writing is similar to
yourself. Writing, like teaching or social life, is a perfor­
mance, a job of acting.
Many times in your writing career, though, you will be
required to be less than candid. It would be bad for a dean to
tell everything in her memorandum-bad for the college,
bad for the students. If you are the VP for Sales you are not
under oath to reveal in your advertising that the com peti­
tor's product is better and cheaper. The ethical problem sits
right in the middle of the road. "Rhetoric" gets a bad name
from such problem cases-of having to tell less than the
truth for another worthy goal. Being clear before you decide
to hide the whole truth will at least make the choice plain.
You won't be deciding to lie by accident. Welcome to life's
dilemmas.
39

Everyone has a problem with tone-student and pro­
fessor, employee and boss. The student will sometimes use
an implied author encountered only in government forms,
using phrases like "due to" and "period of time" and "views
were opposing. " No one really talks like this. Adopting the
implied author The Newspaper Reporter is a natural alter­
native, since much of the reading a student does is from
newspapers. The stuff will be snappy, but it's hard to toler­
ate outside the newspaper. The journalist writes for the one­
paragraph jolt. A Hollywood autobiography ("with the assis­
tance of Elmer Snerd") will have this implied author. It
reads like a year's worth of the National Enquirer.
Out of stage fright, professors in economics overuse
the pompous and unintelligible implied author The Scien­
tist. Have pity on them, and help them overcome their fear.
C. Wright Mills' discussion of the problem of writing sociol­
ogy is applicable to economics and other academic writing:
Such lack of ready intelligibility, I believe, usually has little
or nothing to do with the complexity of subject matter, and
nothing at all with profundity of thought. It has to do almost
entirely with certain confusions of the academic writer about
his own status . . . . [Because the academic writer in America]
feels his own lack of public position, he often puts the claim
for his own status before his claim for the attention of the
reader to what he is saying . . . . Desire for status is one reason
why academic men [and women: Mills lived in a notably sexist
age] slip so readily into unintelligibility . . . . To overcome the
academic prose you have first to overcome the academic pose.
It is much less important to study grammar and Anglo-Saxon
roots than to clarify your answer to these important ques­
tions: (1) How difficult and complex after all is my subject?
(2) When I write, what status am I claiming for myself? (3)
For whom am I trying to write? (p. 2 18 f.)

40

In other words, what spoils academic writing is lack of con­
fidence.
It's really not that difficult to explain a Malthusian
demographic model or a rational expectations model in plain
words to smart people willing to pay attention. A reader of a
student paper or of a professional journal is smart and will­
ing. Above all, in other words, one must decide to be under­
stood and worry some other time about being admired. Do
not try to impress people who already understand the argu­
ment (they will not be amused). Try to explain it in a reason­
able tone to people who do not now understand. Your
roommate is a good choice of audience, or your professor:
neither will stand still for fakery.
Tone of writing is like tone of voice. It is personality
expressed in prose. Students would do better to reveal more
of their character in their writing. A college teacher on the
whole likes students (or else she would be selling insurance).
So don't worry. Be nice, not servile or pom pous. Similar
words of comfort apply to the professor herself: relax; take
off the mask of The Scientist; you 're lovable.
The worst mistake is to be unpleasant: if you yell at
people they will walk away, in reading as at a dorm party.
Avoid invective. "This is pure nonsense" ; "there is abso­
lutely no evidence for this view" ; "the hypothesis is fanciful"
are fun phrases to write, deeply satisfying as only political
and intellectual passion can be, but they arouse the suspi­
cion in any but the most uncritical audience that the argu­
ment needs a tone of passion to overcome its weakness.
Adam Smith (in his best book, The Theory of Moral Senti­
ments) pointed out that indignation by you the Author
against That Idiot arouses in the reader sympathy for That
41

Idiot, which is not what your indignation was meant to
achieve (l.ii.3.4).
Tone is transmitted by adverbs, those "-ly" words that
drive up the emotional pressure of verbs or adjectives. Run
your pen through each "very" (or tell your word processor to
flag it). Most things aren't very. '½.bsolutely," "purely," and
the like are the same: most things aren't absolute or pure,
and to claim so conveys a falsely emphatic tone. "Literally"
is routinely misused, as when a Federal judge said that the
Clinton administration was " literally and figuratively
declaring war on the Special Prosecutor. " The word means
actually, in truth, in actual fact. Yet no tanks or cannons
were drawn up around the Special Prosecutor's office. The
judge meant, "Wow, I really feel this strongly!! " Screaming
is not speaking well.
Keep your opinions pretty much to yourself. Strunk
and White warn (p. 80) that "to air one ' s views gratu­
itously . . . is to imply that the demand for them is brisk. " To
air them intemperately reduces whatever demand there is.
A comical example of what can go wrong with verbal abuse
is : "These very tendentious arguments are false. " The
writer meant "tenuous" [look it up]. But even had she said
"tenuous, " the word "these" gives the reader the fleeting
and hilarious impression that the writer was characterizing
her own arguments, not the victim's. Tenuous and tenden­
tious they are.
Wit compensates for tendentiousness, as in the liter­
ary careers of the journalist H. L. Mencken and the econo­
mist George Stigler. Men cken ' s railings against the
boobocracy, or Stigler' s against the bureaucracy, were made
less tiresome by rhetorical coyness, ducking behind self­
repudiating exaggeration or arch understatement. The
42

reader allows such writers more room to be opinionated
because their opinions are so amusingly expressed.
Most academic prose, from both students and faculty,
could use more humor. There is nothing unscientific in self­
deprecating jokes about the sample size, and nothing
unscholarly in dry wit about the failings of intellectual oppo­
nents. Even a pun can bring cheer to a grader working
through the 54th term paper. A writer must entertain if she
is to be read. Only third-rate scholars and C students are so
worried about the academic pose that they insist on their
dignity. The Nobel laureate Robert Solow says of economic
prose:
Personality is eliminated from journal articles because it's
felt to be "unscientific. " An author is proposing a hypothesis,
testing a hypothesis, proving a theorem, not persuading the
reader that this is a better way of thinking about X than that.
Writing would be better if more of us saw economics as a way
of organizing thoughts and perceptions about economic life
rather than as a poor imitation of physics. (1984)

43

14
Pclragraphs Should
Have Points
So much for the essay as a whole. Turn then to the para­
graph. (I'm not much enjoying the principle of arrangement
I've imposed here: essay-paragraph-sentence-word. I wish I
were better at such things.) The paragraph should be a more
or less complete discussion of one topic. Paragraphing is
punctuation, similar to stanzas in poetry. The stanzas can't
be too long. You will want occasionally to pause for various
reasons, having completed a bit of discussion, shifting the
tone perhaps or simply giving the reader a break. The reader
will skip around when her attention wanders, and will skip
to the next paragraph. If your paragraphs are too long (as
they will tend to be from a word processor, by the way) the
reader will skip a lot of your stuff to get to the next break.
Paragraphs, though, should not be too short too often.
The same is true of sentences.
Short paragraphs give a breathless quality to the writ1ng.
Newspaper writers, especially on the sports page, often
write in one-sentence paragraphs, for the sheer excitement
of it.
Big quotations (in a block if more than four typed lines,
always indented, with no quotation marks around the
whole) have two legitimate jobs. First, they can give the
devil his due. If you plan to rip to pieces a particular argu­
ment then you should quote it in full, to give at least the
impression of being fair. Mild criticism, however, can't fol44

low a big quote: you must indeed rip it to pieces, word by
word. Otherwise the reader feels that the effort of settling
into a new style has not been worthwhile. Second, block quo­
tations can give an angel her voice. If the great economist
Armen Alchian said something strikingly well with which
you entirely agree, then you do not hurt your case by repeat­
ing what he said, and gaining from his greatness. Routine
explanations do not belong anywhere, whether in long or
short quotations. They convey the impression that you
think with your scissors, and not very well.
A word is in order here about plagiarism. "Plagiarism"
is using other people's turns of phrase with the intent of
claiming them as your own. Please don't: it's childish and
immoral. The worst students sometimes do it out of desper­
ation, then claim that they didn 't understand the rules.
Because they are the worst students they often get caught.
It's a serious offense, and in a well-run college results in
expulsion. No college paper can be fashioned by stringing
together passages from other writers. Your teachers know
you can read, at least in the sense of spelling out the words.
They want you to learn how to think and write. Please help
them do it.

45

15

Make Tubles, Graphs, and Displayed
Equations Readable
The wretched tables and graphs in economics show how lit­
tle economists care about expression. Tables and graphs are
writing, and the usual rules of writing therefore apply. Bear
your audience in mind. Try to be clear. Be brief. Ask: "Is this
entry necessary? Would I dribble on in a similar way in prose
or mathematics?" No reader wants the annual figures of
income between 1900 and 1980 when the issue is the growth
of income over the whole span. The reader wants statistics
given in the simplest form consistent with their use. The
eight digits generated by the average calculator are not ordi­
narily of any use. Who wants to read 3. 14159256 when 3 1 /7
describes the elasticity without making the reader stop to
grasp the stream of numbers? (The point is widely misun­
derstood. Read Oskar Morgenstern, On the Accuracy of Eco­
nomic Observations, 2nd ed. , chapter 1.)
Titles and headings in tables should be as close to self­
explanatory as possible. In headings of tables you should use
words, not computer acronyms. Remember: you're trying to
be clear, not Phony Scientific. A column labeled "LPDOM"
requires a step of translation to get to the meaning: "Loga­
rithm of the Domestic Price. " You want people to under­
stand your stuff, not to jump through mental hoops.
The same principles should guide graphs and dia­
grams. Edward R. Tufte's amazing book, The Visual Display
of Quantitative Information ( 1983), demonstrates such pre­
cepts as "Mobilize every graphical element, perhaps several
46

times over, to show the data" (p. 139; Tufte is not to be taken
as a guide to writing prose). Everyone who uses tables or
graphs should buy and study Tufte's book, and then reward
themselves by getting his second book, Envisioning Infor­
mation ( 1990). Use titles for diagrams and for tables that
state their theme, such as '�l Conferences Should Happen
in the Midwest" instead of "A Model of Transport Costs. "
Use meaningful, spelled-out names for lines, points, and
areas, not alphanumeric monstrosities: "Rich Budget Line"
instead of "Locus QuERtY. " You 'll find it easier to follow
your own argument and will be less likely to produce graph­
ical nonsense.
The same things can be said of displayed equations.
It's clearer and no less scientific to say "the regression was
Quantity of Grain = 3.56 + 5.6 (Price of Grain) - 3.8 (Real
Income) " than "the regression was Q = 3.56 + 5.6P - 3.8Y,
where Q is quantity of grain, P its price, and Y real income. "
Anyone can retrieve the algebra from the words, but the
reverse is pointlessly harder. The retrieval is hard even for
professional mathematicians. The set theorist Paul Halmos
said: "The author had to code his thought in [symbols] (I
deny that anybody thinks in [such] terms), and the reader
has to decode" (p. 38, italics mine). Stanislav Ulam, with
many other mathematicians, complains of the raising of the
symbolic ante: "I am turned off when I see only formulas
and symbols, and little text. It is too laborious for me to look
at such pages not knowing what to concentrate on " ( 1976, p.
2750 . Tables, graphs, diagrams, and displayed equations
should elucidate the argument, not obscure it.

47

16

Footnotes Are Nests for Pedants
A footnote should be subordinate. That is why it is at the
foot. In academic and student writing, however, the most
important work sometimes gets done in the small print at
the bottom of the page. The worst sustained example in eco­
nomics is Schumpeter's History of Economic Analysis
( 1954), in which the liveliest prose and the strongest points
occur toward the end of footnotes spilling over three pages.
Footnotes should not be used as a substitute for good
arrangement. If the idea doesn't fit maybe it doesn't belong.
Cluttering the main text with little side trips will break up
the flow of ideas, like the footnote 1 attached to this sentence.
Footnotes should guide the reader to the sources.
That's all. When they strain to do something else they get
into trouble. Your attempt to assume the mantle of The
Scholar looks foolish when the best you can do is cite the
textbook. Citing whole books and articles is a disease in
modern economics, spread by the author-date citation, such
as that used in this book. It is easier for the author to write
1 Inviting the reader to look away is not wise. Practically never is

it a good idea to do what this note does, breaking a sentence. It
should have been woven into the text, if it said anything, which
it does not. Aren't you annoyed that I made you look down?
Waste of time, yes? An amusing footnote on the matter, viewing
it more cheerfully, is G. W. Bowersock, "The Art of the Foot­
note" (1983/84).

48

"See The General Theory" than to bother to find the page
and sentence where Keynes, fatally, adopts the mistaken
assumption of a closed economy. By not bothering to find it
the author misses the chance to reread, and think.

49

17
Make Your Writing Cohere
Behind rules on what to avoid lies a rule on what to seek. It's
the Rule of Coherence: make writing hang together. The
reader can understand writing that hangs together, from
phrases up to entire books. She can't understand writing
filled with irrelevancies.
Look again at the paragraph I just wrote. It's no mas­
terpiece, but you probably grasped it without much effort.
The reason you did is that each sentence is linked to the pre­
vious one. The first promises a "rule. " The second names it,
repeating the word "rule"; after the colon the next bit deliv­
ers on the promise of the name, using the word "writing" for
the first of three times and the phrase "hang together" for
the first of two. The sentence next tells why it is a good rule,
reusing "hang together" and introducing a character called
"the reader," saying that she "can understand" certain writ­
ing. The final sentence emphasizes the point by putting it
the other way, saying what writing she cannot understand.
The paragraph itself hangs together and is easily grasped by
the mind.
Economists would call it "transitive" writing. To do it
you must violate the schoolmarm's rule of not repeating
words. Verily, you must repeat them, linking the sentences
and using pronouns like "it" or "them" to relieve monotony.
The linkages can be tied neatly, if not too often, by repeating
words with the same root in different versions, as was just
done with the verb "linking" in the previous sentence and
the noun ''linkages" in this (the figure is called in classical
50

rhetoric "polyptoton " ) . There are other tricks of cohesion.
They rely on repetition. (In this paragraph for instance the
word "repetition " is repeated right to the end in various
forms: repetition, repeating, repeat, repeating, repetition. )
If you draw on the tricks you will be less likely to fill
your prose with irrelevancies : (AB) (BC) (CD) looks pretty,
i s e asy t o u n d er s t a n d , an d i s p r ob ab ly r e as o n ab l e ;
(AB ZYX) ( MN O P ) ( BJKLC ) looks ugly, i s impo ssible t o
understand, and is probably nonsense. A newspaper editor
once gave this advice to a cub reporter: "It doesn 't much
matter what your first sentence is. It doesn 't even much
matter what the second is. But the third damn well better
follow from the first and second. " If you once start a way of
talking-a metaphor of birth in economic development or a
tone of patient explanation to an idiot-you have to carry it
through, making the third sentence follow from the others.
You must reread what you have written again and again,
unifying the tenses of the verbs, unifying the vocabulary,
unifying the form. That's how to get unified, transitive para­
graphs.
Yet, a clumsy way to get transitive paragraphs begins
each sentence with a linking word. Indeed, not only did good
Latin prose in the age of Cicero have this feature, but also
Greek had it, even in common speech. In English, however,
it is not successful. Therefore, many Ciceronian and Greek
adverbs and conjunctions are untranslatable. To be sure,
the impulse to coherence is commendable. But on the other
hand (as must be getting clear by now), you tire of being
pushed around by the writer, told when you are to take a
senten ce illustratively ( " in deed " ) , adversatively ( "yet, "
"however, " "but" ) , sequentially ( " furthermore, " "there­
fore " ) , or concessively ( "to be sure " ) . You are crushed by

51

clanking machinery such as the hideous "not only . . .. but
also. " English achieves coherence by repetition, not by sig­
nal. Repeat, and your paragraphs will cohere.

52

18

Use Your Ear
Prose has rhythms , some better than others. Abraham Lin­
coln and Martin Luther King knew rhythm in speech. Some­
one less gifted can at least avoid ugly rhythms by listening
to what they have written. For instance, if every sentence is
the s ame length and cons truction, the paragraph will
become monotonous. If you have some dramatic reason for
repeating the construction, the repetition is good. If you
have no good reason for doing so, the reader will feel misled.
If you talk always in sentences of precut form, the para­
graph will have a monotonous rhythm. If you have been pay­
ing attention recently, you will see what I mean.
The novelist John Gardner gave some good advice
about variety in sentences (p. 1040. Become self-conscious,
he said, about how much you're putting into each part. An
English sentence has grammatically speaking three parts:
subject, verb, object. Thus : subject = ''An English sentence";
verb = "has grammatically s peaking" ( "grammatically
speaking" modifies the verb "has") ; object = "three parts :
subject, verb, object." Vary your sentences, Gardner sug­
gested, by how much you put into each, and in each sentence
choose only one of the three parts for elaboration. In the
sentence just finished the score is: subject absent but under­
stood = "you"; verb = "vary, " complexly modified by "how
much you put into each" object = "your sentences, " quite
simple, though not as simple as the subject. Gardner, who
wrote pretty well, uncovered beautifully with his simple
principle of the three sentence parts which we have just dis53

cussed and could discuss more if it were a good idea, which
it is not, because we've said enough already, the graceless
rhythm that results from an overburdened sentence such as
this one, in which every part has much too much in it, every
phrase too much in the way of excessive adjectives and too
many adverbs modifying its elements, which exhausts the
reader, and confuses him. Notice that you stopped paying
attention about half way through it. A sentence with too
much in all three of its parts can ruin a paragraph. (That
last follows Gardner's Rule: a complex subject ['½. sentence
with too much in all three of its parts"] connected to a sim­
ple verb ("can ruin"] and simple object ("a paragraph"] . )

54

19

Write in Complete Sentences
Which leads to the sentence. That is not one. Such tricks
should be attempted only occasionally, and only for a reason
(here: a dramatic surprise, if corny). Write mainly in com­
plete sentences. This isn't a matter of school grammar. It's
a matter of not raising expectations that you don't fulfill. As
a fluent speaker of English (or at least of your dialect), you
know when a sentence is a sentence by asking whether it
could stand as an isolated remark. Now the phrase ''As a flu­
ent speaker of English " could stand alone, but only as an
answer to a question in a conversation. Socrates: "Tell me,
Polus: how do you know what an English s entence is? "
Polus : ''As a fluent speaker of English. " Ask if it could stand
alone as an isolated remark. No, it can't. If someone came up
t o you on th e street an d s aid "As a fluent s peaker of
English, " you would expect her to continue. If, continuing to
stare at you fixedly with a maniacal smile, she did not, you
would edge carefully away.

55

20

Avoid Elegant Variation
The first duty in writing a sentence is to make it clear. A way
to make it clear is to use one word to mean one thing. Get
your words and things lined up and keep them that way. The
positive rule is Strunk and White's: "Express parallel ideas
in parallel form. " [An example is about to happen:] The neg­
ative rule is Fowler's : "Avoid Elegant Variation. " The two
ideas are parallel and are expressed in parallel form: "The
positive rule is" leads the reader to expect "The negative
rule is. " One hears every day the pair "positive" and "nega­
tive." The reader gets what she expects. She can fit the little
novelties into what she already knows.
Elegant Variation uses many words to mean one thing,
with the result in the end that the reader, and even the
writer, don't quite know what is being talked about. A paper
on economic development used in two pages all these :
"industrialization, " "growing structural differentiation, "
"economic and social development, " "social and economic
d evelopment, " " d evel opm ent, " " eco n omic gr owt h , "
"growth, " and "revolutionized means of production. " With
some effort you can see in context that they all meant about
the same thing. The writer simply liked the sound of the dif­
ferences and had studied elegance too young. A writer on
economic history wrote about the "indifferent harvests of
1815 and calamitous volume deficiencies of 1816. " It takes a
while to see that both mean about the same thing, a pretty
simple thing. Notice that Elegant Variation often comes
draped in five-dollar words ("growing structural differentia56

tion" = new jobs in manufacturing; "indifferent harvests "
= bad crops ; "calamitous volume deficiencies " = very bad
crops).
Some people who write this way mistake the purpose
of writing, believing it to be a chance for empty display. The
eighth grade, they should realize, is over. Most people do it
out of correctable ignorance, as in: "the new economic his­
tory is concerned not only with what happened but also with
why events turned out as they did. " Something is wrong.
The logic is that the reader imagines fleetingly that "what
happened" and the "events [that] turned out as they did "
are different things. She must give thought to whether they
are. Elegant Variation requires the pointless effort to see
that calamitous volume deficiencies are the same thing as
bad crops. It wastes the reader's attention on unimportant
matters. If the reader's attention strays a little-and it is
always straying, a lot-she will come away from the sen­
tence without knowing what it said.
Yet you also want to avoid pointless repetition. "It is a
place where work gets done. The new plan gets done by set­
ting a new agenda. " The two "gets done" are not quite the
same, so it's confusing to use the same phrase. Yet, yet: don 't
vary your words just to please Miss Jones.

57

21

Watch How Each Word
Connects with Others
Trimming away the elegant variation, like other rules of
rewriting, does not make the writer's life easy. Most people's
first drafts (including mine, believe me) are jammed with
elegant variation, traffic signals, illogical sentences, non­
sentences, misquotations, boilerplate, monotonies, and jin­
gles. Easy writing, remember, makes hard reading. Dr.
Johnson said two centuries ago, "What is written without
effort is in general read without pleasure. " Like effort in any
work, such as sewing or auto repair, you must check and
tighten, check and tighten. In short sessions the exercise
will please you. It's good to do something well. The neat
seam in a dress or the smooth joint in a fender revive the
spirit worn from the effort. Still, before the end it is tiring.
Do nouns and verbs link successive sentences? Have I used
one word to mean one thing? Have I used parallel forms to
emphasize parallel ideas? Can I drop any word? Check and
tighten. The care extends to tiny details. For instance, you
must choose repeatedly whether to carry over words from
one construction to its parallel. Should you write "the beau­
tiful and damned" or "the beautiful and the damned"?
Realize that in English gerunds ( "supplying" ) and
infinitives ( "to supply" ) are close substitutes. You can say
"Supplying a profitable forecast is a contradiction of eco­
nomics " or "To supply a profitable forecast is a contradic­
tion of economics . " You can use the substitute to avoid a
58

repetition that would otherwise be ugly or misleading, or to
keep a parallelism.
Put modifiers-adjectives , adverbs, and whole phrases
called in Miss Jones ' class "participles"--close to the word
they modify. Otherwise they tend to connect with other
words and spoil the meaning.
Other tools to line up word and thing are singulars and
plurals, masculines and feminines. Unlike the inflected
Latin and Anglo-Saxon from which it descends, English does
not have cases and gender (surviving in he, she, it, her, him,
his, hers, its, I, me) to keep related words hitched. Use the
few resources we have. The following sentence, for example,
is ambiguous because "them" can refer to so many things :
"Owners of the original and indestructible powers of the soil
earned from them [powers or owners?] pure rents, and that
tenant farmers were willing to pay them [the rents? the
owners? the powers?] indicates that these powers of the soil
were useful. " You can work out what it means, but remem­
ber that the object is not to write so that the reader can
understand but so that she cannot possibly misunderstand.
The singulars and plurals here are not essential to the
meaning, and so they can be exploited to make it clear: '�n
owner of the original and indestructible powers of the soil
earned from them [now effortlessly unambiguous because it
agrees with the only plural referent available: the powers]
pure rents, and that the tenant farmers were willing to pay
him [unambiguous : the owner] indicates that these powers
of the soil were useful. " The use of "she" alongside "he" can
in like fashion become an advantage for clarity of reference
as much as a blow for sexual equality. If you assign gender
to the two people you are talking about (as I do sometimes
59

here in distinguishing the writer from the reader) then your
reader will see what you mean.
Capitals are useful word-changes, too: you can make a
word into a concrete and Proper Noun by capitalizing it,
which is useful for reference. It's easy to point at a named
Thing. That's why arguments in economics go by n�mes,
even by names of people: "the Coase Theorem" is more vivid
than "the proposition that property rights matter to alloca­
tion in the case of high transaction costs " (which, inciden­
tally, is th e correct st atement of the theorem, widely
misunderstood in economics) . Capitalization can be used
nicely for referring to a Point in a diagram. Be careful,
though: capitals have an Ironic Air to them, which is Fun
only in Moderation (I tend to use them Too Much).

60

22

Watch Punctuation
Another detail is punctuation. You might think it would be
easy, since there are only seven marks (excepting parenthe­
ses [and brackets, which are used in math style for paren­
theses within parentheses or for your insertions into some­
one else's words] ). But feelings run strong on the matter.
You should understand the old printer's conventions about
spaces in typing after marks of punctuation. After a comma
(,), semicolon ( ;), or colon (:), put one space before you start
something new. After a period (.) , question mark (?) , or
exclamation point ( ! ), put two spaces. Just do it: don't argue.
It makes word processing short of desk-top publishing look
better.
You should also understand, and forgive, the strange
convention about quotation marks and punctuation. Con­
trary to what you would think, "the close quote goes inside
the mark of punctuation, thus. " Look where the period is at
the end of that last sentence. In the author-date system used
in this book and in most of economics look at: "how one
treats a quotation" (McCloskey 2000). Notice where the end
quotation mark, the parentheses containing the citation,
and the period are placed. You '11 look silly if you do what
freshmen do: "a quotation here followed by the close quota­
tion mark and a period and then the lonely citation ".
(McCloskey 2000) Not evil: we're not talking child murder
here, just picking up the wrong fork at a formal dinner.
Don't do it.
61

The period is no problem, though to understand the
most notable use of it in literature you have to know that in
the English of England it is called a "full stop" : in the last
sentence of their spoof history of England, 1 066 and All
That, Sellars and Yeatman write that after the First World
War ''America became Top Nation and history came to a. "
Nor is the question mark a problem: judge it by ear: are you
using the questioning tone of voice? The dash-used like
this, a sort of parenthesis spoken in a louder tone of voice-­
can be overused to solve a problem with a badly organized
sentence (I do it a lot in drafts ), but is not otherwise difficult.
A lot of people are confused about the colon ( : ) and the
semicolon ( ;). The safest rule is that the colon indicates an
illustration to follow: just like this . The semicolon indicates
a parallel remark; it is (as here) an additional illustration.
The semicolon ( ;) means roughly "furthermore"; the colon
( :) means roughly "to be specific. " The semicolon is also used
to mark off items in series when the items themselves are
long. "Faith, hope, and charity" uses commas; but if each
item were elaborated ( "Charity, the greatest of these, the
light of the world"; and similarly with each) you might use
the semicolon (;) as a sort of supercomma. You can see that
the semicolon is also a sort of period lite; you can hurry the
pace a bit by splicing two sentences with a semicolon, as
here. So the semicolon falls between comma and period.
Remember the difference between colon and semicolon by
noting that the semicolon contains both a comma and a
period within it, a printed compromise.
The comma. Here's where everyone gets confused or
argumentative. Avoid the dreaded Comma Splice, I've just
used one, I connected two sentences, now three, I intend to
keep doing it, it will drive you crazy, it's a grade-school error,
62

your boss will think you're a dope. The rule is if both clauses
could stand alone as sentences then you need either a big­
time mark (period, semicolon, colon) or a conjunction. "The
citizens lived in fear, the result was poor economic growth"
contains a comma splice. Change it to: "The citizens lived in
fear. The result was poor economic growth." or "The citizens
lived in fear, and the result was poor economic growth. "
(And yet I have found comma splices in the writings of Mat­
thew Arnold, admitted as one of the masters of English in
the nineteenth century; it's social custom all the way down.)
Weak writers these days use too many commas, and
use them by rule rather than by ear, probably because Miss
Jones told them to. It's no rule of life, for instance, that "an
if-clause always requires a comma after it" or "When a
clause cannot stand alone it must be hedged with commas."
In fact, such rules lead to a comma in nearly every sentence,
and consequent slowing of pace. When applied too enthusi­
astically the rule-driven comma ends up separating subject
from verb. (Notice that I did use a comma after the "In fact"
in the sentence before last but not after "When applied too
enthusiastically" in the next. Stay tuned.) In revision the
trick is to delete most commas before "the, " as I just did
after "In revision," and did a couple of sentences earlier
after "When applied too enthusiastically" ; I didn't do it after
"In fact" in the earlier sentence because the next word was
not "the. " The "the" signals a new phrase well enough with­
out the clunk of a comma.
And yet: one must not be dogmatic about the comma.
It is easy to fall into silly rules , mine as well as thine. The
best rule is to punctuate by ear rather than by rule, and to
insert a comma, as after "rule" here, where the pause in
speaking seems to want it or where you as a reader get lost

63

without it. When you want your prose to be read slowly and
deliberately, and you have signaled this ponderous and aca­
demic tone in other ways as well, then use commas heavily.
For most writing use them lightly.

64

23

The Order Around Switch Until It
Good Sounds
Inflected languages have more freedom of order than
English. In Latin Hom o canem m ordet means the same
thing as Canem m ordet h om o, with only a difference of
emphasis; but "man bites dog" and "dog bites man" are
news items of different orders. Still, much can be done with
the order of an English sentence. With the order of an
English sentence much can be done. You can do much with
the order of an English sentence. It's mainly a matter of ear:
proper words in proper places. Tinker with the sentence
until it works.
A problem comes with modifiers, especially with
adverbs, which float freely in English. The phrase "which is
again merely another notation for X" should be "which
again is merely another notation for X." Moving the "again"
prevents it from piling up against the other modifier. Or:
"the elasticities are both with respect to the price" should be
"both elasticities are with respect to the price. " Until they
work, try out the words in various places. In various places
try out the words until they work. Try out the words in var­
ious places until they work. There. If you can't get them to
work, give up the sentence as a bad idea.
You should cultivate the habit of mentally rearranging
the order of words and phrases of every sentence you write.
Rules, as usual, govern the rewriting. One rule of arrange­
ment is to avoid breaking, as in this clause, the flow with

65

parenthetical remarks . Put the remark at the end if it's
important and at the beginning if it's not.
The most important rule of rearrangement is that the
end of the sentence is the place of emphasis. I wrote the sen­
tence first as "The end of the sentence is the emphatic loca­
tion, " which put the emphasis on the word "location. " The
reader leaves the sentence with the last word ringing in her
ears. I wanted, however, to emphasize the idea of emphasis,
not the idea of location. So I rewrote it as " . . . is the place of
emphasis . " You should examine every sentence to see
whether the main idea comes at the end-or, second in
emphasis, the beginning. Dump less important things in the
middle, or in the trash. A corollary of the rule is that putting
less important things at the end will weaken the sentence.
It would be grammatical to write "That putting trivial
things at the end will weaken the sentence is a corollary of
the rule. " Yet it shifts the emphasis to something already fin­
ished, the rule. The clearer way emphasizes the novelty, the
idea of the weakened sentence, by putting it at the end.
Listen for sentences that are monotonously long or
short; listen for straggling sentences, as in
That foolish young man of Japan,
Whose limericks never would scan.
When asked why it was
He replied, "It's because
I always try to get as much into the last line as I ever
possibly can. "

Adding one more idea at the last minute causes straggling,
which comes even in a perfectly grammatical sentence like
the present, making the sentence hard to read, which will
cause the reader to stop reading after she has tried a couple

66

of sentences like this one, which straggle, straggle, straggle.
Remember Gardner's Rule of not complicating more than
one of the triad subject, verb, object. The lengthy bits, as I
said, should be at the end, although the rule will often con­
flict with the rule of putting the important matter at the
end. At a minimum you should be aware of length and try it
out in different portions of the sentence. The success of
those eighth-grade ornaments, the doublet and the triplet
(use them sparingly: write with a rifle, not a shotgun) ,
depends critically on shifting the longest portions to the
end: "Keynes and the Keynesians '' works, "The Keynesians
and Keynes " does not; "faith, hope, and charity" works ,
"charity, faith, and hope" does not.

67

24
Read, Out Loud
Reading out loud is a powerful technique of revision. By
reading out loud you hear your writing as others hear it
internally, and if your ear is good you'll detect the bad spots.
For instance, it's practically impossible to decide when to
use contractions like "you'll" or "it's" in semiformal prose
without reading the sentence out loud. By reading out loud,
furthermore, you'll pick up unintentional rhymes (at times
your lines will chime), which can be distracting and mirth­
provoking. Remember the rule: don't write anything that
you would be embarrassed to read out loud to the intended
audience. As usual, Hemingway had it right: "The writer
needs a built-in, shockproof bullshit detector. " You know
more about good taste in the language, and how to spot
bullshit, than you think. If in rereading your writing out
loud you blush to hear an over-fancy sentence or a jargony
word, change it.
No one, though, knows everything just because she's
an English-speaking citizen. The ear is trained by exercise.
Read the best old books (only when books are old do we
know whether they are the best: the bestsellers of today are
mostly rubbish) . Take pleasure in the language of literature.
Read poetry out loud, lots of it, the best. Memorize some of
it (you know the lyrics of scores of rock songs: that's poetry;
you might as well learn some of the real stuff, too) . If you
stop reading good writing when you leave school you will
stop improving your ear. Even an economist's ear should
ring with our English literature. Close study of Time and

68

the Wall Street Journal doesn't normally suffice as an edu­
cation in literacy-although it must be admitted that jour­
nalists like Meg Greenfield, Dave Barry, and P. J. O'Rourke
use the newspaper language admirably well, and are good
models. They got that way, though, by reading the real stuff,
Shakespeare and Ring Lardner.

69

25

Use Verbs, Active Ones
Finally, words. The snappiest rules of good writing are about
words. For instance, write with nouns and, especially, verbs,
not with adjectives and adverbs. In revision the adjectives
and adverbs should be the first to go. Delete as many as you
can. Around 1830 the humorist Sydney Smith wrote, "In
composing, as a general rule, run your pen through every
other word you have written; you have no idea what vigour
it will give to your style. " He might have followed his own
advice more fully, and would have done so if writing nowa­
days:
In compo�ing [of course it's composing: that 's what we 're
talking about, you dunce!], as a g.9n9raJ. rul8 [what would be
the point of any other?] , run your pen through every other
word you havQ writtQn [of course writing: again, that's what
we 're talking about; and in any case, what else would you run
a pen through ? Your finger?] ; you have no idea what vigour
it will give to your style ffor goodness sake, how often do you
have to repeat that you are talking about style ?]

The result is: "Run your pen through every other word; you
have no idea what vigour it will give. " (In both Smith's ver­
sion and mine the word "it" is ambiguous: it's not instantly
clear what "it" refers to. But that's another matter.)
Use active verbs : not "active verbs should be used, "
which is cowardice, hiding the user in the passive voice.
Rather: "you should use active verbs." The imperative is a
good substitute for the passive, especially for talcing a reader
70

through mathematical arguments: "then divide both sides
by x" instead of "both sides are then divided by x. "
Verbs make English. If you pick out active, accurate,
and lively verbs you will write in an active, accurate, and
lively style. You should find the action in a sentence and
express it in a verb. Expressing it in a phrase functioning as
a noun saps vigor. The disease is called "nominalization, "
and it afflicts most academic prose (mine, for instance). The
teacher of style, Joseph Williams, who discusses nominaliza­
tion at length, gives an example that might have come from
economics: "There is a data reanalysis need. " The only verb
is the colorless "is, " and the real action is buried in the
nouns "need" and "reanalysis" (Williams, p. 12) . You can fix·
such a sentence by using verbs: "We must reanalyze our
data. " Circle every "is" in your writing, and if the page looks
like a bad case of acne, replace every "is" with a real, action
verb.
"There is" and "It is" often cause problems. (I wrote
that first as "are often problems, " then thought better and
found the action in the sentence.) Notice that a real verb
requires a real subject. There's no place to hide. The "data
reanalysis need, " by contrast, merely exists, blessedly free
from personal responsibility (the freedom from responsibil­
ity makes nominalization popular among bureaucrats ;
that's us, often, so don't sneer). Find the actor and the
action. Find the verb. You have no idea what vigor it will
bring.

71

26

Avoid Words That Bad Writers Love
Because it's easy at the level of the single word to detect and
punish crime the legislative attitude toward prose reaches
its heaven in lists of Bad Words . Some perfectly good
English words have died this way: for instance, "ain 't. "
Good writers have mental lists of words to avoid. At a mini­
mum certain words will tag you as incompetent simply
because good writers have decided so. For example, though
it's unfair to the inexperienced and there's nothing what­
ever in the nature of the linguistic universe to justify it, you
might as well know that in some company if you use "hope­
fully" to mean "I hope" you will be set down as a fool. Hope­
fully General Booth entered heaven is supposed to mean
"with hope, " not "I hope. "
If economic prose would drop "via, " "the process of, "
"intra, " " and/or, " "hypothesiz e, " "respectively, " and (a
strange one, this) "this" the gain in clarity and grace would
be big. If it would drop " at least minimal, " "process of, "
"thus ' " "overall ' " "basic ' " and "factor" the world would be
saved. The best practice provides the standard. Virginia
Woolf would not write "and/or" or "he/she " because she
wanted prose, not a diagram. Some others that I'm sure Vir­
ginia would have disliked appear in my personal list of Bad

Words.

72

Vague nouns and pronouns:
concept: a vague, Latinate (that is, pretentiously derived
from Latin) , front-parlor word ; con sider " idea, "
"notion, " or "thought. "
data: over- and mis-used in economics. "Data" are plural,
although the word is clearly on its way to becoming sin­
gular in the language. "Data" means "givens" in Latin,
and that is how you should use it, not as a do-all synonym for "facts' " "statistics , " "information , " "observations, " and so forth. The word embodies, incidentally, a
dangerous attitude toward observation-that it is
"given" by someone else-but the point here is one of
style. "Datum" is one "data, " though only pedants use it.
function: in the sense of "role" is Latinate.
situation: vague. "Position " or "condition" are better,
depending on the meaning.
individuals: for plain "people. "
agents: the same.
structure: vague. There are no obvious alternatives to
structure because the word usually doesn't mean any­
thing at all. On this and other similar words in econom­
ics, see Fritz Machlup ( 1963, 1967).
process: usually empty, and can be struck out (sometimes
with its "the") without changing the meaning: "the eco­
nomic development process" or "the transition process"
become plain "economic development" or "the transi­
tion. "
the existence of: strike it out, and just name the thing.
time frame: means "time"; it originates in the engineer's
dim notion that "time" means "passage of time" alone,
73

and not "a point in time" (another engineering expres­
sion). But the notion is false.

Pretentious and feeble verbs:
critique: elegant variation for "criticize" or "to read criti­
cally" or "to comment on. "
implement: Washingtonese, a rich and foolish dialect of
Economese.
comprise: fancy talk for "include" or "consist of. "
analyze: over- and mis-used in economics as a synonym for
"discuss" or "examine. " Look it up in your dictionary. It
meant in Greek "cut to pieces. "
hypothesize: for "suppose" or "expect. " This word tags you
(similar words: "finalize, " "and/or, " "time frame").
finalize: boardroom talk. See "hypothesize, " academic
boardroom talk.
state: in the mere sense of "say" ; why not say "say"? "State
means "assert, with conviction. "
try and do something is "try to do something" (strangely,
"try and" is common among educated English people; in
the United States it is a marker of incompetence).
the reason was due to: try again.
Pointless adjectives:
former . . . latter: the above; the preceding: and other
words that request the reader to look back to sort out the
former and latter things. Don 't request the reader to
look back, because she will, and will lose her place. Never
ask the reader to solve a puzzle, because she won 't be
able to and will get angry.
aforementioned: what are you writing, a will?
74

intra/inter: do not use. Do not present verbal puzzles to
your reader. Everyone has to stop to figure out what
these prefixes mean. Use "within" and "between. "
"International" and "intramural" are fine, (?f course,
being well domesticated. But "The inter- and intra-firm
communication was weak" is silly. Fancy talk.
interesting: a weak word, made weak by its common sarcas­
tic use and by its overuse by people with nothing to say
about their subject except that it is interesting. It
arouses the reader's sadism.
kind of, sort of, type of: vague, vague, vague. Use sparingly.
Useless adverbs:
fortunately, interestingly, etc.: cheap ways of introduc­
ing irrelevant opinion.
respectively: as in "Consumption and investment were 90%
and 10% of income, respectively. " Why would anyone
reverse the correct order of the numbers? (Answer:
someone who does not express parallel ideas in parallel
form.) Drawing attention to the lack of parallelism by
mentioning explicitly that it did not take place is a bad
idea. When the list is longer, distribute the numbers
directly; "Consumption was 85% of income, investment
10%, and government spending 5%. "
very: the very general rule is to think very hard before using
"very" very much, and to very often strike it out. It's a
weak word.
for convenience: as in, "For convenience, we will adopt the
following notation. " A silly phrase, when you think
about it. All writing should be for convenience. What
would be the point of writing for inconvenience?

75

Often you'11 find that adverbs can be dropped (look for
words ending in -ly). They often convey your opinion, which
only your mother cares about.
Clumsy conjunctions:
due to: usually signals a clumsy phrase, due to not arranging
the sentence to sound right.
via: plain "by" is the word wanted.
in terms of: clumsy and vague; compare "due to.''
thus and hence: use traffic signals sparingly.
plus to mean and: use "and" until the language has finished
changing "plus" into "and, " which will take another cen­
tury or so. I know you use it when you talk. Well, speech
can be improved by writing, too.
The vocabulary of economics, like other vocabularies,
is enriched by coinages and borrowings: the Laffer curve,
the affluent society, the agency problem. Contrary to a wide­
spread impression among non-economists, though, master­
ing the vocabulary of economics is not the same as mas­
tering economics.
Everyone, economist or not, comes equipped with a
vocabulary for the economy. It might be called Ersatz Eco­
nomics. In Ersatz Economics, prices start by "skyrocket­
ing. " When "sellers outnumber buyers" prices fall from
"exorbitant" or "gouging" levels, down through "fair" and
"just. " If this "vicious cycle" goes on too long, though, they
fall to "unfair" and "cutthroat, " the result of "dumping. "
Likewise, the woman in the street believes she knows that
unions and corporations have more "bargaining power''
76

than do their victims, and therefore can "exploit" them. A
consumer can "afford" medical care, maybe only "barely
afford" it, "needs " housing, and views food as a "basic neces­
sity." Business people maintain their "profit margins, " prob­
ably "obs cene" or "unwarranted, " by "passing along" a
higher wage, which causes workers to demand still higher
wages, in a " spiral . " The protection of th e American
worker's "living wage" from "unfair competition" by "cheap
foreign labor" should be high on the nation's list of "priori­
ties, " as should be the "rebuilding" of our "collapsing"
industrial "base. "
To write thoughtfully in economics you must clear
your mind of such cant, as to understand astronomy you
must stop talking about the sun "rising."

77

27

Be Concrete
A good general rule of words is Be Concrete. A singular word
is more concrete than a plural (compare "Singular words are
more concrete than plurals"). Definiteness is concrete. Pre­
fer Pepperidge Farm to bread, bread to widgets, and widgets
to X. Bad writers in economics sometimes use abstraction
because they have nothing to say and don't want the fact to
become too plain, in the style of educational bureaucrats.
Mostly, though, they use abstraction to get general. They
don't believe that the ordinary reader will understand that
"Pepperidge Farm" can stand for any commodity or that
"ships" can stand for all capital. Secret codes use the princi­
ple that translation is often easier in one direction than the
other. Contrary to what most economic writers seem to
think, of course, a reader finds it harder to translate abstrac­
tions down into concrete examples than to translate exam­
ples up into abstract principles. Much economic writing
reads like a code. "%& * marginal# #$$ processof& %$ #@
#$ % !structure. "
Professional economists develop into professional code
breakers. To an economist there does seem to be much
wrong with a sentence such as this: "Had capital and labor
in 1860 embodied the same technology used in 1 780, the
increase in capital would barely have offset the fixity of
land. " Here is a better way: "Had the machines and men of
1860 embodied the same knowledge of how to spin cotton or
moue cargo as in 1780, the larger numbers of spindles and
ships would have barely offset the fixity of land. " In a paper
78

on Australia the phrase "sheep and wheat" would do just
fine in place of "natural resource-oriented exports . " In a
paper on economic history "Spanish prices began to rise
before the treasure crune" would do just fine in place of "the
commencement of the Spanish Price Revolution antedated
the inflow of treasure. " Writing should make things clear,
not put them into a code of Latinate abstraction.

79

28
Be Plain
The encoding often uses five-dollar words to support a pose
of The Scientist or The Scholar. The pose is pathetic: science
and scholarship depend on the quality of argument, not on
the level of diction. "The integrative consequences of grow­
ing structural differentiation" means in human-being talk
"the need for others that someone feels when he buys rather
than bakes his bread. " Anglo-Saxon words (need, someone,
feels, buys, bread, bake) have often acquired a concreteness
through homely use that more recent and more scholarly
coinages from Latin or Greek have not (integrative, conse­
quences, structural, differentiation: all directly from Latin,
without even a domesticating s.ojourn in French) . " Geo­
graphical and cultural factors function to spatially confine
growth to specific regions for long periods of time" means in
Anglo-Saxon and Norman French "it's a good bet that once
a place gets poor it will stay poor. "
Five-dollar words sometimes are fun. In the hands of a
master they transmit irony, as in the analysis of sports by
the great American economist, Thorstein Veblen: sports
"have the advantage that they afford a politely blameless
outlet for energies that might otherwise not readily be
diverted from some useful end. " But you've got to be Veblen
to get away with such stuff. In most hands it's just Latin-fed,
polysyllabic baloney: "Thus, it is suggested, a deeper under­
standing of the conditions affecting the speed and ultimate
extent of an innovation's diffusion is to be obtained only by
explicitly analyzing the specific choice of technique problem
80

which its advent would have presented to objectively dissim­
ilar members of the relevant (historical) population of
potential adopters. " Come off it, Professor D.
A lot of economic jargon hides a five-cent thought in a
five-dollar word. Economists have forgotten that it's jargon.
"Current period responses" means "what people do now" ;
"complex lagged effects" means "the many things they do
later. " "Interim variation" means "change" ; "monitored
back" means "told. " Economists would think more clearly if
they recognized a simple thought for what it is. The "time
inconsistency problem" is the economics of changing one's
mind. The "principal/agent problem" is the economics o f
what hirelings do.
The great jargon-generating function in economics is
what may be called the teutonism, such as der Grossjargon­
generatingfunktion. German actually invents words like
these, with native roots that no doubt make them evocative
to German speakers ( classical Sanskrit did it too, using as
many as twenty elements). Again it does not suit the genius
of modern English. A common one is "private wealth-seek­
ing activity, " which is a knot in the prose. Untie it: "the
activity of seeking wealth privately. " When laid out in this
way, with the liberal use of "of, " the phrase looks pretty
flabby. "Private" is understood anyway, "Activity of" is
pointless (note that nothing happens when you strike it out
and reform the phrase). By the principle of untying the knot
"the seeking of wealth" is what is left.
The unknotting will introduce "of" a lot: "factor price
equalization" is muddy, though a strikingly successful bit of
mud; "the equalization of the prices of factors" is clearer, if
straggling. Most teutonisms do not make it as attempts to
coin new jargon. "Elastic credit supply expectations rise" is
81

too much to ask of any reader: she must sort out which word
goes with which, whether the supply or the expectations are
elastic, and what is rising. Hyphens help, but impose more
notation. The reader can digest "The long.run balance of
payments adjustment" much easier if it's put as "the adjust­
ment of the balance of payments in the long run. " The result
is inelegant, but no less elegant than the original, and
clearer. Here are more knots that the reader must stop to
untie: "anti-quantity theory evidence" ; "contractually uni­
form transaction cost" ; "initial relative capital goods price
shock"; "any crude mass expulsion of labor by parliamen ­
tary enclosure thesis" ; "community decision making pro­
cess " ; " Cobb-D ouglas production function estimation
approach" ; "alternative property rights schemes. "
The possessive, unless attached to a proper noun
(Samuelson's genius, Gary's pride) , is not used much by
good writers. It's overused by poor writers, who delight in
phrases like "the standard economist's model." The posses­
sive is a teutonism generator and has the teutonic ambigu­
ity: what's standard, the model or the economist? Sure, you
can figure it out: but a writer is not supposed to leave a
bunch of things for you to figure out.
Remember Sydney Smith running his pen through
every other word: You should reexamine any phrase with
more than one adjective, considering whether it might be
best in leaner form, and should watch especially for nouns
used as adjectives. It is the genius of English to let verbs
become nouns and nouns adjectives. You go to the club, get
a go in cribbage, and hear that all systems are go at the
Cape. What is objectionable is piling up these nounverbad­
jectives teutonically.
82

29

Avoid Cheap 1ypographical 1ricks
Another objectionable practice is the acronym, such as
"Modigliani and Miller (henceforth M&M) " or "purchasing
power parity (PPP). " Besides introducing zany associations
with candy and second-grade humor, the practice pimples
the page and adds a burden of excess notation on the reader.
The demands of the computer have worsened the situation.
Resist, and remember that even expert mathematicians do
not think in symbols. An occasional GDP or CAB won't hurt
anyone, but even such a commonplace as GDCF pains all
but the most hardened accountant. "Gross domestic capital
formation" is fine once or twice to fix ideas, but then "capital
formation" or (after all) plain "it" will do the job. Believe
me: people will not keep slipping into thinking of it as NDCF
or GCF or GC. The point is to be clear, not to "save space"
(as the absurd justification for acronyms has it, absurd
because the acronyms in most long papers save a half dozen
lines of print, less than the pointless table-of-contents para­
graph). As usual, good writers set the standard of what to
do . Yo u won't find them b affling their readers with
LQWAGE and BBLUUBB.
Certain other typographical devices need careful han­
dling. Use these "devices" sparingly, they add an "air" of
(henceforth "AAO" ) Breathlessness or Solemnity or Coy­
ness! The point is that they add something, instead of "let­
ting it speak for itself' (LISFI) . They are, so to speak, sound
effects ! The reader "understands" this, and doubts every­
thing that is said! ! LISFI is better. Using these "devices"
83

instead of LISFI suggests that something is wrong with the
prose as is. If you use italics (underlining) to make your
point clear it is probably because the sentence is badly set up
to give emphasis naturally. Fix it. If you use "quotation
marks" all the time when not actually "quoting" someone,
it is probable that you wish to "apologize" for the "wrong"
word or to sneer at "it. " Don't. It's impolite to cringe or to
sneer.
Don 't justify (align the right margin in) an essay
meant for an academic audience. That is, set your computer
to produce a ragged right margin. The rule is a good example
of the arbitrary, picking-up-the-right-fork character of some
rules. Justification makes it look like you value cute tricks
with your computer more than the writing itself. And it
often
produces
lines
like
this
one.

84

30

Avoid This, That, These, Those
Another plague is this-ism. These bad writers think this
reader needs repeated reminders that it is this idea, not that
one, which is being discussed. Circle the "this" and "these"
in your draft: you'll be surprised at their number. The "this"
points the reader back to the thing referred to, for no good
reason. No writer wants her reader to look back, for looking
back is looking away, interrupting the forward flow and
leaving the reader looking for her place. Thises and thats are
demonstrative pronouns on the way to becoming the defi­
nite article ("le" and la" in French come from Latin "ille"
and "illa" = "that" ; ancient Greek went through a similar
development from Homeric to Attic). But we already have a
definite article. It's called "the" (derived from an Indo-Euro­
pean word meaning "that"). Often the plain "the" will do
fine, and keep the reader reading. Consider repeating the
word represented by "this. " Repetition, remember, brings
clarity and unity to English. The rule is to query every
"this" or "these. " Take most of them out.

85

31

Above All, Look at Your Words
Beyond such matters of taste lies idiom. You must write
English, no easy matter. The prepositions of English are its
substitute for the grammatical cases that inflected lan­
guages have. Prepositions cause trouble. Try experimenting
to get them right: is it "by" an increase "of" supply or
"because" of an increase "in" supply? God and the best writ­
ers know. Verbs often come preposition-enriched: write
down, write up, and the like. Pare the prepositions away if
they are not essential.
Words often come in pairs : one "overcomes, " not
"cures, " one's ignorance. Thinking in word pairs, on the
other hand, leads to the cliche. Flee the cliche when a more
original word is precise and vivid. Observe what varied
thoughts about "the pursuit of profit" are suggested by flee­
ing the cliche: seeking or finding or having or uncovering or
coming upon or bumping into profit; and pursuing gain or
maximum wealth or opportunities or stimuli or satisfaction
or success. The Austrian economist F. A. Hayek said that he
came to understand the role of information in a market
economy by thinking hard about a phrase his colleagues at
the London School of Economics in the 1930s found merely
funny: the ignorant redundancy "given data" (as I've noted,
the word "data" already means "givens, " in Latin). "That
led me, in part, to ask to whom were the data really given.
To us [staff at the school], it was of course to nobody. . . .
That's what led me, in the thirties, to the idea that the
whole problem was the utilization of information dispersed

86

among thousands of people and not possessed by anyone. "
New words imply new thoughts. Wordthought is a part of
thinking.
One should think what a word literally means and
what it connotes. English is jammed with dead metaphors,
easily brought to life with incongruous effect. Good writers
examine their words for literal meaning, to make sure that
the metaphors remain dead or are at the least brought to life
in a decorous way. Look at what you have written: are the
words literally possible? "The indicators influenced the con­
trols. " How does an indicator influence a control? Someone
wrote "the severity of the models. " Punishments, not mod­
els, can be "severe. " What he meant is that the models make
assumptions that are hard to believe. He should have found
words to say it: unbelievability, implausibility.
There is no end to word lore. Study of dictionaries and
style books and the best writing of the ages will make you at
least embarrassed to be ignorant, the beginning of wisdom.
You should know that "however" works better in a second­
ary position. You should know that "in this period" is usu­
ally redundant, that numbered lists are clumsy (so I have
used one to arrange my book!), that "not only . . . but also"
is a callow Latinism, that "due to" is bureaucratese, that use
of "regarding X" or "in regard to X" is definite evidence of a
bad education in the language.
Be of good cheer. You have plenty of company in such
errors. We all have a lot to learn.

87

If You Didn't Stop Reading,
Join the Flow
Good style is above all a matter of taste. Professional econo­
mists share with college sophomores, I noted at the outset,
the conviction that matters of taste are "mere matters of
opinion, " the notion being that "opinion" is unarguable. A
matter of taste, however, can be argued, often to a conclu­
sion. The best argument is social practice, since that is what
taste is. Many people with a claim to know have listed the
same rules for writing English, which fact is itself a powerful
argument. Mark Twain listed seven rules, familiar now,
which would revolutionize economics. The writer must:
1 . Say what he is proposing to say, not merely come
near it.
2. Use the right word, not its second cousin.
3. Eschew surplusage.
4. Not omit necessary details.
5. Avoid slovenliness of form.
6. Use good grammar.
7. Employ a simple and straightforward style.
1

George Orwell, fifty years later, narrowed the rules down to
six:
1 . Never use a metaphor, simile or other figure of
speech which you are used to seeing in print.
2. Never use a long word where a short one will do.
3. If it is possible to cut a word out, always cut it out.
88

4. Never use the passive where you can use the active.
5. Never use a foreign phrase, a scientific word, or a
jargon word if you can think of an everyday English
equivalent.
6. Break any of these rules sooner than say anything
outright barbarous.
To improve in writing style you must become your own
harshest editor and grader, as you must become your harsh­
est coach to improve in running or your harshest critic to
improve in thinking generally. Good writing is difficult. Eco­
nomics, however, is too fine a subject to be left in a verbal
mess out of mere laziness. What is at first difficult becomes
a pleasure in the end, like any skill of civilization, an occa­
sion for flow.
In brief, then: We can do better, much better, than the
say-what-you're-going-to-say, elegant variation, inefficient
exposition, boilerplate, incoherent paragraphs, impenetra­
ble tables, unemphatic word order, straggling sentences,
contrived triplets, verbosity, nominalization, passive verbs,
barbaric neologisms, abstractions, five-dollar words, teu­
tonisms, acronyms, this-es, and fractured idioms of modern
economic prose. Please. For our splendid science.

89

Works Cited
Bartlett, John. 1955. Familiar Quotations, 13th ed. Boston:
Little, Brown.
Barzun, Jacques. 1976. Simple and Direct: A Rhetoric for
Writers. New York: Harper and Row.
Barzun, Jacques, and Henry F. Graff. 1 9 7 0 . The Modern
Researcher. New York: Harcourt Brace.
Becker, Howard S. 1986. Writing for Social Scientists: How to
Start and Finish Your Thesis, Book, or Article . Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Booth, Wayne C. 1974. Modern Dogma and the Rhetoric of
Assent. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Bowersock, Glen W. 1983/1984. "The Art of the Footnote. " The
American Scholar 53: 54-63.
Cohen, J. M . , and M. J. Cohen. The Penguin Dictionary of
Modern Quotations, 2nd ed. Harmondsworth, Middlesex:
Penguin.
Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly. 1997. Finding Flow: The Psychology
of Engagement with Everyday Life. New York: Basic.
Dillard, Annie. 1989. The Writing Life. New York: Harper.
Fowler, H. W. 1926 ( 1965) . Modern English Usage. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Galbraith, J. K. 1978. "Writing, Typing and Economics . "
Atlantic 24 1 (March): 102-105.
Gardner, John. 1983. The Art of Fiction: Notes on Craft for
Young Writers. New York: Knopf.
Gowers, Sir Ernest. 1962. The Complete Plain Words. London:
Penguin.
Graves, Robert, and Alan Hodge. 1943 (196 1). The Reader Over
Your Shoulder: A Handbook for Writers of English Prose.
New York: Macmillan.

91

Hall, Donald. 1979. Writing Well, 3rd ed. Boston: Little, Brown.
Halmos, Paul R. 1973. In Steenrod, Norman E. and others,
How to Write Mathematics, pp. 19-48. No city: American
Mathematics Society.
James, Simon. 1984. A Dictiona ry of Economic Quotations .
Totowa, NJ: Barnes and Noble.
Lanham, Richard A. 1987. Revising Prose, 2nd ed. New York:
Macmillan.
Lewis, Norman . 1 983 . A Dictionary of Correct Spelling: A
Handy Reference Guide. New York: Barnes and Noble.
Lucas, F. L. 1955 ( 1974). Style. London: Cassell.
Machlup, Fritz. 1963 ( 1967). Essays in Economic Semantics.
New York: Norton.
McCloskey, Deirdre. 1985. "Economical Writing. " Economic
Inqui ry 24 (April): 187-222.
McCloskey, Deirdre. 1997. The Vices ofEconomists; The Virtues
of the Bourgeoisie. Ann Arbor and Amsterdam: University
of Michigan and University of Amsterdam Press.
McCloskey, Deirdre. 1998. The Rhetoric of Economics. 2nd
revised ed. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
McCloskey, Deirdre, and Stephen Ziliak. 1996. "The Standard
Error of Regression. " Journal of Economic Literature 34
(March): 97-1 14.
M edawar, Peter. " Is the Scientifi c Pap e r Fraudulent? "
Saturday Review 4 7 (August 1): 42-43.
Mills, C. Wright. 1959. "On Intellectual Craftsmanship. " In his
The Sociological Imagination. New York: Grove.
Morgenstern , Oskar. 1963. On the Accuracy of Economic
Observations , 2nd ed. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Oakeshott, Michael . 1933. " Poetry as a Voice in the Con­
versation of Mankind, " in his Experience and Its Modes.
92

Reprinted in Rationalism in Politics. 1962 . New York:
Basic Books.
Orwell, George. 1946. "Politics and the English Language."
Reprinted in Sonia Orwell and Ian Angus, eds. 1968. The
Collected Essays, Journalism and Letters of George Orwell,
Vol . rv, In Front of Your Nose, 1 945-1950. New York:
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Oxford Dictionary of Quotations, 2nd ed. 1953. London: Oxford
University Press.
Piaget, Jean, and Jean-Claude Bringuier. 1980. Conversations
with Jean Piaget. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Popp e r, Karl . 1 9 7 6 . Un e n ded Q u es t: An In tellec t u a l
Autobiography. Glasgow: Collins.
Quintilian. 1980. Institutio Oratoria. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.
Salant, Walter. 1969. "Writing and Reading in Economics. "
Journal of Political Economy 77 (July/August): 545-558.
Solow, Robert. 1984. Letter of February 27 to McCloskey.
Strunk, William, Jr., and E. B. White. 1979. The Elements of
Style, 3rd ed. New York: Macmillan.
Tufte, Edward R. 1983. The Visual Display of Quantitative
Information. Cheshire, CT: Graphics Press.
Twain, Mark. 1895. "Fenimore Cooper's Literary Offenses. "
The North American Review (July). Reprinted in The
Unabridged Mark Twain. 19 76. Philadelphia: Running
Press.
Ulam, Stanislaw. 1976. Adventures of a Mathematician. New
York: Scribner's.
Webster's New World Dictionary of the American Language,
2nd college ed. 1976. Cleveland: William Collins & World.
Williams, Joseph M. 198 1. Style: Ten Lessons in Clarity and
Grace. Glenview, IL: Scott, Foresman.
93

Williamson, Samuel T. 194 7 . " How to Write Like a Social
Scientist. " Saturday Review 20 (October): 17 ff.

94

Index
Abstraction, avoidance of, 7879
Academic pose, 35, 40, 43
Academic prose, 43
Acronyms, 46
avoiding, 83-84
Adjectives
overabundance of, 9
pointless, 74-75
Adverbs
coherence and, 5 1
overuse/misuse of, 42, 70
useless, 75-76
Alchian, Armen, 45
Analogy, in economic
invention, 18
Arrangement
in economic rhetoric, 1819
of sentence, 13, 53, 65-67
The File and, 23
Audience, for writing, 33-34
Author, implied, 39-40
Barzun, Jacques, 9, 36
Becker, Howard S., 9
Blundell, William E., 9
Boilerplate, 35-38
Booth, Wayne, 9, 17
Bowersock, G. W., 48
Brevity, 17, 70

Capitalization, 60
Churchill, Winston, 1 1
Clarity, golden rule of, 12-14
Cliche, 86
Coherence, rule of, 50-52
Colomb, Gregory, 9
Colon, correct use of, 62
Comma
incorrect use of, 62-63
overuse of, 13
Conjunctions, clumsy, 76
Criticism, 2, 45
Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly, 14
Dash, correct use of, 62
Definiteness, 78
Diamond, Arthur, 15
Dictionaries, 26
Dillard, Annie, 7, 9
Double negatives, 16
Draft, first, 22-24, 58
Dullness, 35
Elegant variation, 56-57
Emphasis, within sentences,
66
Equations, 4 7
Essays, rules at level of, 1 7-43
Fethke, Gary, 20
File, The, 22
Five-dollar words, 56, 80-81
Fluency, 20-2 1, 29-32

95

Footnotes, 48-49
Fowler, H. W., 10, 56
Galbraith, J. K., 3
Gardner, John, 53
sentence packing, 6 7
Gender, 59
Gerunds, 58
Gowers, Sir Ernest, 9
Graff, Henry F., 9, 36
Graphs, 46-4 7
Graves, Robert, 6, 8, 12
Halmos, Paul R., 9, 32, 47
Hayek, F. A., 86
Hemingway, Ernest, 3, 25, 33,
68
Hodge, Alan, 6, 8, 12
Humor, 43
Idiom, 86
Implied author, 39-40
Implied reader, 33-34
Indignation, avoidance of, 41
Infinitives, 58
split, 10-1 1
Invective, 41
Invention
in rhetoric, 17-18
The File and, 23
Italics, 6, 84
James, Simon, 28
Jargon, 81
Journals, 22
Justification of margins, 84

96

Keynes, John Maynard, 6, 49
Lanham, Richard A., 9, 14, 26
Latin, contrasts with English,
51, 80
Linking, 50-5 1
Looking back, avoid, 85
Lucas, F. L., 9, 33
Machlup, Fritz, 73
Mathematical writing, 7, 32
McCarthy, Mary, 15
McCloskey, D. , 4, 15, 18, 61
Meanings, literal, 87
Medawar, Peter, 19
Mencken, H. L., 42
Metaphors, 87, 88
Mills, C. Wright, 22, 40
Miss Jones' rules, 10
Monotony, 50
Morgenstern, Oskar, 46
Nominalization, 7 1
Nouns/pronouns, vague, 73
Oakeshott, Michael, 30
Opening statement ("hook"),
36
Opinions, 42-43
understa·tement and, 42
Order, 65-67
Orwell, George, 8, 15
rules for writing, 88-89
Outlining, 23, 30

Paragraphs
rules at level of, 44-45
transitive writing of, 5051
Parallelism, 16, 56, 59, 75
Participles, 59
dangling, 10
Passive voice, 15
Period, correct use of, 62
Personality, in writing, 30, 43
Piaget, Jean, 32
Plagiarism, 45
Plurals, 59, 78
Popper, Karl, 12
Possessives, 82
Prepositions
correct use of, 86
ending sentences with, 1 1
Punctuation, 6 1-64
Quintilian, 12
Quotation marks, 61, 84
Quotations
books of, 28
using, 44-45
Reader, implied, 33-34
Reading aloud, 30, 68-69
Reflection, systematic, 22
Repetition, 11, 37, 52, 57, 85
Research, 19-20, 22, 29
Revising, 31, 33, 68, 70
Rewriting, 31, 33, 65
Rhetoric, classical, 17-19
arrangement, 18-19
invention, 17-18

style, 20-2 1
Rhythms in prose, 53-54
Rules, justification of, 8-1 1
Salant, Walter, 3
Say-what-you're-going-to-say,
11, 37
Semicolon, correct use of, 62
Sentences
ambiguity in, 59
complete, 55
order in, 65-67
variety in, 53-54
Shaw, George Bernard, 26
Similes, 88
Singulars, 59, 78
Smith, Adam, 41
Smith, Sydney, 70
Solow, Robert, 43
Spelling, 26-27
Steenrod, Norman E., 9
Stigler, George, 42
Strunk, William, 8, 56
Style, 16
and content, 6-7
and good writers, 15-16,
68
in classical rhetoric, 2021
rewriting and, 33-34
Sutch, Richard, 34, 35
Swift, Jonathan, 27
Table-of-contents paragraph,
37
Tables, 46-4 7

97

Taste, 16, 20-2 1, 88
Teutonisms, 81-82
Thesaurus, 27
Thinking, writing as, 6-7, 22
This-ism, 85
Thomas, Francis-Noel, 9
Toggling, 25-26
Tone, 39-43
Tufte, Edward R., 46, 47
Turner, Mark, 9
Twain, Mark, 8
rules for writing, 88

Verbs
active, 70-71
pretentious and feeble, 7 4

Ulani, Stanislav, 4 7
Unknotting, 81

White, E. B., 8, 56
Williams, Joseph M., 8, 9, 71
Williamson, Samuel T., 3
Wit, 42-43
Wolfe, Tom, 15
Woolf, Virginia, 33, 72
Word processing, 25
Words
bad, 72-77
rules at level of, 58-60,
70-87

Veblen, Thorstein, 80

Ziliak, Stephen, 4

98

