Pricing Power in Advertising Markets:
Theory and Evidence
Matthew Gentzkow, Stanford University and NBER*
Jesse M. Shapiro, Harvard University and NBER
Frank Yang, Stanford University
Ali Yurukoglu, Stanford University and NBER
September 2023
Abstract
Existing theories of media competition imply that advertisers will pay a lower price in equilibrium to reach consumers who multi-home across competing outlets. We generalize, extend,
and test this prediction. We find that television outlets whose viewers watch more television
charge a lower price per impression to advertisers. This finding helps rationalize well-known
stylized facts such as a premium for younger and more male audiences on television. A quantitative version of our model whose only free parameter is a scale normalization can explain
35 percent of the variation in price per impression across owners of television networks, and
aligns with recent trends in television advertising revenue. We use the model to quantify the
impact of mergers and the effect of Netflix ad carriage on prices for linear television advertising. We then extend our analysis to social media markets where we find evidence of a premium
for older audiences (who multi-home less), and we discuss implications for competition across
ad formats.
JEL codes: L10, L82, M37
Keywords: platform competition, media markets
* E-mail: gentzkow@stanford.edu, jesse shapiro@fas.harvard.edu, shuny@stanford.edu, ayurukog@stanford.edu. We thank our many dedi-

cated research assistants for their contributions to this project. We also thank Sylvain Chassang, Matt Notowidigdo, Andrei Shleifer, and seminar
participants at Stanford University, UC Berkeley, the University of Utah, Yale University, Hebrew University, the Department of Justice, the QME
Rossi Seminar, Columbia University, UC Santa Cruz, the IIOC, Helsinki GSE, the Leuven Summer Event, the NBER, the Northwestern Conference
on Antitrust Economics and Competition Policy, MIT, USC, the University of Chicago, Cornell University, the University of Rochester, the NYC
Media Seminar, the WEAM, the MaCCI SICP, and especially discussants Jay Lee, Fiona Scott Morton, Brad Shapiro, Matthew McGranaghan, and
Andrew Rhodes for helpful comments. We acknowledge support from the Eastman Professorship and the Population Studies and Training Center
at Brown University, the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, the National Science Foundation (SES 1260411), and the Toulouse Network for Information Technology. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the funding sources. We thank Mike Bailey for help executing advertising buys on Facebook and Hunt
Allcott, Luca Braghieri, and Sarah Eichmeyer for sharing additional Facebook advertisement data. Portions of our analysis use data derived from
a confidential, proprietary syndicated product owned by GfK US MRI, LLC, which is copyright MRI-Simmons 2021. Portions of our analysis
use data from S&P Global Market Intelligence; SNL Financial LC. contains copyrighted and trade secret material distributed under license from
SNL. The paper includes the researchers’ own analyses calculated (or derived) based in part on data from The Nielsen Company (US), LLC and
marketing databases provided through the Nielsen Datasets at the Kilts Center for Marketing Data Center at The University of Chicago Booth
School of Business. The conclusions drawn from the Nielsen data are those of the researchers and do not reflect the views of Nielsen. Nielsen is
not responsible for, had no role in, and was not involved in analyzing and preparing the results reported herein. Similar caveats apply to other data
sources.

1

1

Introduction

Both traditional and digital media receive substantial revenues from selling ads (e.g., Statista 2021).
Prices for ads in these markets vary widely. On television, prices per impression can easily vary
across programs or networks by a factor of three or more (e.g., Crupi 2009). Prices for online
advertising exhibit similarly large variation (e.g., AdStage 2020). Which consumers’ eyeballs
command the highest prices is a key determinant of the incentive to produce content (Spence and
Owen 1977; Wilbur 2008; Veiga and Weyl 2016). Pricing in advertising markets has become an
important issue in antitrust policy (e.g., Competition and Markets Authority 2019).
Industry observers have long been puzzled by the large variation in the price of impressions
across different groups of consumers. Perhaps the most famous example is the premium paid
to advertise on television programs with younger audiences. The premium attached to younger
audiences—who are sometimes known as the “coveted” or “target” demographic—is widely regarded as a major influence on content and scheduling, and persists despite the fact that older
audiences tend to have greater purchasing power than younger audiences (Dee 2002; Surowiecki
2002; Einstein 2004; Pomerantz 2006; Goettler 2012; Gabler 2014).1 Television advertisers also
pay a premium for advertising to men relative to women (Papazian 2009) and (on a per-impression
basis) for advertising on programs with larger relative to smaller audiences (Chwe 1998; Phillips
and Young 2012; Goettler 2012).
In this paper, we develop an equilibrium model of an advertising market with competing outlets. The model implies that the price per viewer that an outlet charges for its advertisements in
equilibrium is decreasing in the activity level of the outlet’s audience, i.e., in the extent to which
members of its audience visit competing outlets. We show that the model’s predictions are borne
out in data from the US television market, and can help explain well-known and potentially puzzling patterns such as premia for younger, more male, and (on a per-impression basis) larger audiences. A quantitative version of the model whose only free parameter is a scale normalization can
explain 35.1 percent of the variation in price per impression across owners of television networks,
and aligns with recent trends in television advertising revenue. An extension to social media adver1 Gabler (2014 pp.

3-4) writes that those over 49 “have been steadily disenfranchised by a ruthless, self-serving,
myopic and ignorant dictator. That dictator is the eighteen to forty-nine demographic cohort, and it is the single most
important factor in determining what we see, hear and read.” An advertisement run by the American Association for
Retired Persons highlights the value of advertising to older audiences. Its text reads, “I may be gray, but my money
is as green as it gets. Why is it all about 18-34, when they barely have a dime of their own?” (quoted in Newman
2012).

2

tising shows that older audiences are both the least active and command the highest prices online,
and suggests that impressions on social media and television are imperfect substitutes from the
perspective of advertisers.
Our model builds on a large theoretical literature on two-sided markets beginning with Rochet and Tirole (2003) and Anderson and Coate (2005), and extends Anderson, Foros, and Kind’s
(2018) model of advertising pricing in markets with multi-homing. In the model, each of a set of
owners may own multiple outlets, and each outlet may have multiple advertising slots. Owners
simultaneously announce prices to advertise on the slots they own, after which each of a set of
advertisers decides which slots to purchase. Advertisers have homogeneous value functions that
are submodular in the set of outlets on which they advertise. The number of slots on each outlet
exceeds the number of advertisers, so slots are not rationed in equilibrium, and because advertisers are homogeneous, equilibrium is efficient. In particular, equilibrium follows the incremental
pricing principle of Anderson, Foros, and Kind (2018): the price an owner commands for its slots
is determined by the difference in an advertiser’s value from advertising on all outlets versus all
outlets except those controlled by the given owner.
An important special case of a submodular value function arises when advertisers face diminishing returns from multiple impressions to a given viewer, and viewers multi-home in a pattern
that is invariant to advertisers’ choices. In this case, the incremental value of an owner’s advertising slots is determined by the overlap of its audience with those of other owners. In the special case
of perfect diminishing returns, where advertisers value only the first impression to a given viewer,
each owner’s price per impression is determined solely by the fraction of its audience that is exclusive to that owner. The price per viewer that an owner can charge in equilibrium is then decreasing
in the overall activity level of its audience, and increasing in the overall size of its audience.
We study these predictions empirically using data on television audiences and advertising
prices from Nielsen’s Ad Intel database, and audience survey data from GfK MRI. Consistent with
the predictions of the model, we show that outlets whose audiences watch more television charge
a lower price per impression for their ads. Turning to the demographic patterns that have received
significant attention in the industry, we find that the younger, more male audiences that command
a price premium are also those that watch the least television. We also find, consistent with prior
evidence and with the predictions of the model, that outlets with larger audiences command higher
prices per impression, even after accounting for the viewing intensity of their audiences.
We evaluate the fit of a quantitative version of the model. We consider a specification with
3

perfect diminishing returns in which a given viewer’s probability of seeing an ad on a given outlet
is proportional to the time that the viewer spends on the outlet. We consider a baseline specification
in which viewers differ only in their viewing behavior, and one in which higher-income viewers
are intrinsically more valuable to advertisers. Based on these specifications we use the audience
survey data to calculate the incremental value of advertising on each owner’s outlets, which in
turn yields a prediction for the equilibrium price charged by each owner for its advertising slots.
We find that the model’s predictions are a good fit to observed prices. Predicted prices explain
34.0 to 35.1 percent of the variation in price per impression across owners, with a slope close to
unity in the specification that incorporates viewer income. The model also rationalizes the fact
that television advertising revenues have risen slightly in the last several years despite a decline in
audience and impressions. This is true despite the fact that the model’s quantitative predictions for
relative prices across owners, and for trends in revenues over time, are based only on the audience
survey data and therefore do not use any information on observed advertising prices. We use the
quantitative model to show how competition shapes the incentive to attract viewers from different
demographic groups.
We apply the quantitative model to two further questions. First, we study the effects of several
recent mergers of television network owners on the combined advertising revenues of the merging
entities. The model-predicted effects vary widely in ways that would be difficult to predict using
standard concentration measures such as the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI), but are wellapproximated by measures based on the overlap in the merging entities’ audiences. Second, we
study the effect of Netflix carrying advertising on the price of advertising on linear television.
In a scenario where Netflix carries ads across its platform, and there is no change in audience
behavior, we estimate a decline in price per impression of between 0.38 and 2.7 log points across
television owners, with owners whose audience overlaps more with Netflix tending to experience
larger declines in price per impression.
In the final part of the paper, we extend our analysis to social media. We specify a model
in which ads may be sold and targeted at the viewer level on social media. The model allows
diminishing returns to operate more strongly within television or within social media than between
the two, such that ads on the two formats may be imperfect substitutes from the perspective of
advertisers. When cross-format substitutability is limited, the model predicts that the age-price
relationship on social media should be reversed relative to television, with the young—the heaviest
users of social media—commanding the lowest prices, and the old—the lightest users—being the
4

“coveted” group. Alternative explanations for the youth premium, such as the young having more
malleable preferences (Surowiecki 2002), would not all share this prediction. Using data on prices
of Facebook advertisements collected as part of a series of experiments including our own, we
show that ads targeting the oldest users indeed command the highest prices. We compare model
fit as we vary a parameter governing cross-format diminishing returns and find that the best-fitting
parameter implies that television and social media ads are imperfect substitutes.
The primary contribution of this paper is to show that the predictions of a model of a competitive advertising market with multi-homing are a good match, both qualitatively and quantitatively,
to existing and novel facts about important real-world markets. In contrast to many prior studies
of advertising markets (e.g., Kaiser and Wright 2006; Bel and Domènech 2009; Wilbur 2008; Fan
2013; Chandra and Kaiser 2014; Jeziorski 2014; Berry, Eizenberg, and Waldfogel 2016; Zubanov
2020), our quantitative model explicitly derives the price of advertising on a given outlet from
a microfounded equilibrium model with a multi-homing audience.2 Multi-homing is essential to
the model’s implications. In contrast to prior work that incorporates audience demographics into a
model of advertiser demand (e.g., Wilbur 2008; Liao, Sorensen, and Zubanov 2020), our model can
explain demographic premia in advertising prices without assuming that advertisers intrinsically
value certain demographic characteristics.
Our analysis provides a unified explanation of several facts, some of which are new to the
literature. There is a folk wisdom in television advertising that it is more expensive to advertise
to groups that are harder to reach (Surowiecki 2002; Papazian 2009; Gabler 2014).3 Some have
questioned the logic of this proposition.4 We provide what is to our knowledge the first systematic
evidence on the relationship between an outlet’s advertising prices and the activity levels of its
audience, and the first depiction of this relationship grounded in a quantitative economic model.
We also systematically document advertising premia related to audience age, gender, and size. In
2 Gentzkow, Shapiro, and Sinkinson (2014) incorporate a microfounded model of advertising with multi-homing con-

sumers into a structural model of newspapers’ choice of political affiliation, but allow for only a small number of
outlets, and do not study the cross-sectional variation in advertising prices implied by their model. Shi (2016, Section
3.2) proposes an inverse demand function for advertising that is motivated by a model with multi-homing consumers
and diminishing returns to impressions. Greenwood, Ma, and Yorukoglu (2021) calibrate a macroeconomic model
in which consumers can consume multiple media goods but do not receive multiple advertisements from the same
advertiser. Prat and Valletti (2022, Section 4) simulate effects of platform mergers under various assumptions about
overlap in their audience, though using a microfoundation different from ours.
3 Papazian (2009, p. 134) writes that, “as a rule, shows that pull higher proportions of easy-to-get heavy tube watchers
come in at lower [cost per thousand impressions] than those that rely less on this preponderantly lowbrow segment
and more on upscale audiences.”
4 Surowiecki (2002) writes that, “by this logic, advertisers ought to pay top dollar to reach sheepherders in Uzbekistan.”

5

the case of social media, while some industry sources report a premium for older audiences on
social media (e.g., Ampush 2014, Strikesocial 2017), we are not aware of prior evidence in the
academic literature showing that transaction prices in the US are greater for Facebook ads targeted
to older users.5 Turning to time trends, the fact that television advertising revenues have grown
despite a declining audience has been noted as a puzzle, but is predicted by our quantitative model.6
The paper also makes a contribution to the theoretical literature on advertising in two-sided
markets with multi-homing. In particular, we generalize the incremental pricing result in Anderson,
Foros, and Kind (2018) to allow for arbitrary submodular value and ownership structure. Unlike
Ambrus, Calvano, and Reisinger (2016) and Anderson and Peitz (2020), we do not model the
determination of the number of advertising slots. Unlike Athey, Calvano, and Gans (2018), we
do not allow heterogeneity among advertisers in our baseline analysis, though in an extension we
show that incremental pricing holds when the extent of heterogeneity is small or when owners can
charge advertiser-specific prices. Unlike Prat and Valletti (2022), we do not focus on the effects of
the ad market on competition among advertisers, though we do allow for some interactions among
advertisers in an extension. As in Anderson, Foros, and Kind (2018), our model allows for a very
rich description of viewers’ choices of which outlets to watch, a feature we take advantage of when
developing the model’s quantitative implications.7
None of the evidence we present constitutes a pure test of the forces in the model, which would
require changing the competitive environment while holding all other conditions constant. Accordingly, each individual piece of evidence is subject to alternative interpretations, some of which
we highlight in the paper and test in sensitivity analysis. However, to us, the fact that a model that
builds on a large body of economic theory can explain such a wide range of facts—both qualitatively and quantitatively, and across markets, outlets, and over time—suggests that the economic
forces we highlight are important for understanding pricing power in competitive advertising markets.
5 Lambrecht and Tucker’s (2019, Table 7) analysis of average suggested bids for a STEM career information campaign

on the Facebook platform across 191 countries indicates that average suggested bids are higher for ads targeted
to females. The analysis does not show clear differences in average suggested bids by the age of the target users
(columns 1 and 2) but does show evidence of interactions between age and gender (column 3). Our analysis differs
in using transaction price data from campaigns in the US rather than suggested bid data from a campaign across 191
countries.
6 The Economist (2021) writes that, “the Tokyo games illustrate a puzzle: as audiences decline, the TV-ad market is
holding up.”
7 As in Prat’s (2018) analysis of media outlets’ political power and Armstrong and Vickers’ (2022) analysis of oligopoly
pricing with limited consideration, our analysis of outlets’ pricing power emphasizes the importance of individual
consumers’ allocation of attention.

6

The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents our model and its implications. Section 3 describes our data and variable definitions. Section 4 presents our key findings
about the determinants of advertising prices on television. Section 5 presents our quantitative implementation of the model, its fit to the data, and its applications. Section 6 presents our extension
to social media. Section 7 concludes.

2

Model

There is a set of outlets J . A given owner can own multiple outlets, and we define a partition Z
on the set of outlets that describes the ownership structure, using the notation Z ∈ Z to refer both
to a cell of the partition and to the owner of the outlets in that cell. Each outlet has available K
advertising slots, each of which can be sold to one of the N advertisers in the set N . We assume
that N ≤ K, i.e., that advertising slots are not scarce. We let P (·) denote the power set operator, so
that P (Z) denotes the set of all bundles of owner Z’s outlets. A bundle B ∈ P (Z) might consist,
for example, of a single outlet owned by owner Z, or it might contain all outlets owned by owner
Z.
The game proceeds as follows. Each owner Z simultaneously announces, for each bundle
B ∈ P (Z) of its outlets, a price pB at which it will sell one slot on each outlet j ∈ B to any advertiser,
with pB = ∞ denoting that a given bundle B is unavailable. Advertisers then simultaneously decide
which, if any, bundles to buy. When all advertisers have moved, ads are shown and the game ends.
Since we allow each owner to own an arbitrary number of outlets, it is without loss of generality
to assume that each advertiser can purchase at most one slot on each outlet.
The payoff of an owner is given by the sum of the prices pB of all bundles B that the owner
sells. The payoff of an advertiser n that buys slots in a set of bundles Bn ⊆ P (J ) is given by
V ({ j : j ∈ B ∈ Bn }) − ∑ pB ,
B∈Bn

where V (·) is a non-negative value function that is monotone in the set-inclusion order.8 We capture the idea that there are diminishing returns to advertising by assuming that V (·) is submodular:
8 Formally, for any sets of outlets J 0 , J 00 ⊆ J ,



J 0 ⊆ J 00 =⇒ V J 0 ≤ V J 00 .

7

an advertiser derives less incremental value from an outlet when adding it to a larger bundle.9
We assume that the value function V (·) is the same across advertisers, i.e., the advertisers are
homogeneous.
Our main result is that each owner is able to extract the incremental value of the outlets it
controls. To state this result, for each bundle B ⊆ J , let the incremental value vB be given by
vB = V (J ) −V (J \ B) ,
i.e., the value to an advertiser of advertising on all outlets rather than all outlets except those in
B. We assume that every outlet in J has positive incremental value, v j > 0 for all j ∈ J . We use
subgame perfect Nash equilibrium in pure strategies as our solution concept and hereafter refer to
it as equilibrium.
Theorem 1. (Incremental pricing.) There exists an equilibrium. In any equilibrium, all advertisers
buy slots on all outlets, and the payment by each advertiser to each owner Z is given by p∗Z = vZ .
All proofs are given in Appendix A. The proof of Theorem 1 shows that, in any equilibrium, every
owner Z finds it optimal to offer the maximal bundle B = Z for a price given by the bundle’s
incremental value vZ . The intuition can be understood as follows. Consider any equilibrium.
Every owner Z has the option of offering only the maximal bundle Z at a price equal to vZ . With
this offering, regardless of what other owners’ prices are, any owner Z can always sell the bundle
to every advertiser. To see why, note that for any set of outlets S ⊆ J \Z that an advertiser could
have purchased from other owners, the additional value of purchasing bundle Z is
V (S ∪ Z) −V (S) ≥ V (J ) −V (J \Z) = vZ ,
where the inequality is due to the submodularity of V (·). Thus, in equilibrium, owner Z must
secure a profit of at least N ·vZ . Now, suppose toward contradiction that some owner Z earns a profit
strictly higher than N · vZ . Then, some advertiser n must pay owner Z more than vZ . Thus, there
exists an outlet j ∈ J \Z on which advertiser n does not purchase an ad slot, because otherwise,
by the monotonicity of V (·), the advertiser could profitably deviate by not trading with owner Z
9 Formally, for any sets of outlets J 0 , J 00 ⊆ J ,





J 0 ⊆ J 00 , j ∈ J \ J 00 =⇒ V J 0 ∪ { j} −V J 0 ≥ V J 00 ∪ { j} −V J 00 .

8

at all. But, also because of the monotonicity of V (·), this implies that the owner Z 0 of outlet j can
profitably deviate by adding the ad slot on outlet j to the existing bundle that advertiser n purchases
from owner Z 0 and slightly increasing the total price. The existence of a profitable deviation for
owner Z 0 contradicts that the conjectured strategy is part of an equilibrium, thus implying that in
equilibrium each owner must secure a profit of no more than N · vZ , and hence that incremental
pricing holds.
Remark 1. Appendix A.3 shows that versions of incremental pricing hold with rationing (N >
K), with partially increasing returns, with heterogeneity in advertisers’ value functions, and with
alternative market institutions including unbundled pricing, bargaining, or auctioning of ad slots.
2.1

Special Cases

The general model abstracts from, but is consistent with, many types of viewer-level microfoundations. Here we define an important special case that we use to illustrate comparative statics and,
later, to quantify the implications of the model.
Definition. (Viewer-level model.) In the viewer-level model, each viewer i ∈ I is endowed with
an intrinsic value ai to advertisers. Each viewer i sees ads on outlet j with probability ηi j ∈ [0, 1],
independently across outlets. Owners are partitioned into formats F with F the set of all formats.
An advertiser who reaches a given viewer i exactly M ∈ N|F| times in each format obtains value
ai · u (M) where u (·) is monotone and submodular in M, and has decreasing differences in each
argument with u (0) = 0.10 The reach-only model is a special case of the viewer-level model in
which there is a single format and u (M) = 1M>0 .
Appendix A proves that the viewer-level model induces a value function that is monotone and
submodular.
In the viewer-level model, each viewer i is endowed with an intrinsic value ai that might reflect,
for example, differences in income across households. Each viewer is also endowed with viewing
behavior represented by the probability ηi j of seeing ads on outlet j. Outlets are partitioned into
formats, for example television and social media. Advertisers’ value for ads exhibits diminishing
returns, with initial impressions being more valuable than subsequent ones. Diminishing returns
may operate more strongly within than across formats. In the reach-only model, there is a single
=⇒ u (M) ≥ u (M 0 ); u (M) + u (M 0 ) ≥ u (max {M, M 0 }) + u (min {M, M 0 }) for all M, M 0 ∈ N|F |
where max and min denote the componentwise maximum and minimum; and u (M + e (m + 1)) − u (M + em) is
nonincreasing in m ∈ N for all M ∈ N|F | and all standard basis vectors e.

10 That is, M ≥ M 0

9

format and only first impressions matter. Theorem 1 implies the following characterization of
revenues in the reach-only model.
Corollary 1. In the reach-only model the price per viewer of owner Z is given by p∗Z /λZ where
!
p∗Z = ∑ ai ηiZ ∏ (1 − ηiZ 0 )
Z 0 6=Z

i∈I

is the revenue of owner Z,
λZ = ∑ ηiZ
i∈I

is the expected number of viewers seeing an ad on an outlet owned by owner Z, and
ηiZ = 1 − ∏ 1 − ηi j



j∈Z

is the probability that viewer i sees an ad on an outlet owned by owner Z.
Corollary 1 states that, in the reach-only model, the price per viewer p∗Z /λZ is given by the
weighted share of owner Z’s audience that is exclusive to that owner, in the sense of not seeing ads
on any other owner’s outlets.
2.2

Comparative Statics

We provide two comparative statics results in the reach-only model. For these comparative statics
we suppose that all viewers are intrinsically equally valuable; that is, that ai = a > 0 for all i. We
also suppose that viewers can be partitioned into a set G of mutually exclusive demographic groups
g, with viewing behavior homogeneous within groups, i.e., with ηiZ = ηi0 Z = ηgZ for all Z for any
two viewers i, i0 in the same group g. We define a group g ∈ G to be less active than group h ∈ G if
ηgZ ≤ ηhZ for all Z ∈ Z. We let
σgZ =

∑i∈g ηgZ
λZ

denote the share of owner Z’s audience that comes from group g.
We first show that, all else equal, an owner commands a larger price premium for its viewers if
its viewers come from less active groups.
Proposition 1. Suppose that owner Y draws a larger share of its audience from the less active
group g and a smaller share of its audience from the more active group h than owner Z, in the sense
10

that σgY ≥ σgZ and σhY ≤ σhZ , and that the two owners have equal total audience sizes, λY = λZ ,
and equal shares of audience from groups other than g and h, σg0Y = σg0 Z for all g0 6= g, h. Then
owner Y has a higher equilibrium price per viewer than owner Z, pY∗ /λY ≥ p∗Z /λZ .
The inequality in the conclusion of Proposition 1 is strict if ηgZ 0 < ηhZ 0 for some Z 0 ∈
/ {Y, Z},
σgY > σgZ , and ηgZ ∈ (0, 1) for all Z. To see the intuition for Proposition 1, consider the pair of
owners Y and Z. A more active viewer is more likely to view outlets owned by any other owner
Z0 ∈
/ {Y, Z}, resulting in a lower incremental value for both owners Y and Z. Thus, because a
smaller share of its audience comes from the more active group, owner Y can command a higher
price per viewer than owner Z.
Remark 2. Multi-homing is essential to the result in Proposition 1. If there were only a single
outlet (J = 1), or if each group were to watch only one outlet with positive probability, then by
Corollary 1 each owner’s price per viewer would be invariant to the group composition of its
outlets’ audiences.
Remark 3. Competition is essential for the result in Proposition 1. If a single owner were to
own all outlets, then by Corollary 1 the owner’s price per viewer would be invariant to the group
composition of its outlets’ audiences.
We next show that, all else equal, an owner commands a larger price premium for its viewers
if the owner attracts a larger share of the total audience.
Proposition 2. Suppose that owner Y draws a larger audience from every group than owner Z in
the sense that for some δ ≥ 1, we have ηgY = δ ηgZ for all g ∈ G. Then owner Y has a higher price
per viewer than owner Z, pY∗ /λY ≥ p∗Z /λZ .
The inequality in the conclusion of Proposition 2 is strict if δ > 1 and ηgZ ∈ (0, 1) for all Z. To see
the intuition for Proposition 2, consider the pair of owners Y and Z and suppose that there is only
one group of viewers. If a viewer sees ads on an outlet of owner Z 0 ∈
/ {Y, Z}, then by Corollary 1
the viewer does not contribute to the revenue of owners Y or Z. Among the remaining viewers, the
share of those watching Y ’s outlets who also watch Z’s outlets is smaller than the reverse (since
for any viewer the probability of watching Y is greater than the probability of watching Z). This
implies that Y has a larger share of exclusive viewers, and so commands a higher price per viewer.
Remark 4. Appendix A.3 shows that, when each owner owns a single outlet, statements analogous
to Proposition 1 and Proposition 2 hold in the viewer-level model with a single format and general
diminishing returns.
11

2.3

Illustrative Example

To illustrate the intuition for the comparative statics, consider an example of the setting in Section
2.2 with one advertiser, three outlets {1, 2, 3} owned separately by three owners, three groups of
viewers { f , g, h} with equal size, and intrinsic value a = 1. Figure 1 shows four cases.

12

Figure 1: Illustrative Example

Panel (a): Single-homing

Panel (b): Dual-homing

p1
=1
λ1

f

p1
=0
λ1

f

p2
=1
λ2

g

p2
=0
λ2

g

p3
=1
λ3

h

p3
=0
λ3

h

Panel (c): High-activity group
p1 1
f
=
λ1 2

Panel (d): Large vs. small outlet
p1
=0
f
λ1

p2
=0
λ2

g

p2
=1
λ2

g

p3 1
=
λ3 2

h

p3 1
=
λ3 2

h

Notes: Each plot represents one of the examples discussed in Section 2.3. A solid arrow pointing from a
group in { f , g, h} toward an outlet in {1, 2, 3} means that any viewer from the group watches the outlet with
probability 1. A dashed arrow pointing from a group in { f , g, h} toward an outlet in {1, 2, 3} means that any
viewer from the group watches the outlet with probability 12 . Nodes in darker color are the focal outlets for
the discussion in the text.

13

First, suppose that all viewers watch exactly one outlet, as in Panel (a) of Figure 1. In this case,
each owner acts as if it is a monopoly seller by charging a price per viewer equal to 1, because for
each viewer of an owner’s ads, there is no other owner that can show ads to the same viewer.
Second, suppose that all viewers watch two different outlets, as in Panel (b) of Figure 1. In this
case, no owner can command a positive price for its ads because, for each viewer of an owner’s
ads, there is another owner that can show ads to the same viewer. In both Panel (a) and Panel (b),
each owner commands one third of the total audience. The difference between the two settings is
thus not in the concentration of the audience sizes, but rather in the extent of competition to reach
any given viewer.
Third, suppose that viewers from group f only watch outlet 1, viewers from group g always
watch outlets {1, 2} and watch outlet 3 with probability 12 , and viewers from group h watch outlet
3 with probability 21 and no other outlet, as in Panel (c) of Figure 1. Compared to outlet 2, outlet
3 has the same audience size but has a larger share of its audience from the less active group h.
Consistent with Proposition 1, owner 3 commands a higher price per viewer than owner 2, because
all viewers of outlet 2 also watch at least one other outlet, whereas half of the viewers of outlet 3
exclusively watch outlet 3.11
Fourth, suppose that viewers from group g only watch outlet 2, and viewers from both of the
other two groups always watch outlet 3 and watch outlet 1 with probability 12 , as in Panel (d) of
Figure 1. Compared to outlet 1, outlet 3 has the same group composition but has a larger audience
size. Consistent with Proposition 2, owner 3 commands a higher price per viewer than owner 1,
because all viewers of outlet 1 also watch another outlet, whereas half of the viewers of outlet 3
exclusively watch outlet 3.
2.4

Discussion

Bundling. We assume that each owner can offer an arbitrary menu of bundles of its outlets,
which includes selling the slots on all outlets as a single bundle (pure bundling) and selling only
individual slots (no bundling). Bundled ad pricing is common in practice.12 Appendix A.3 shows
that, when some owners may not be able to bundle their outlets, a version of incremental pricing
11 Proposition 1 applies with strict inequality in this example because viewers from group h watch outlet 1 6= 2, 3 with

strictly smaller probability than viewers from group g.
12 In the context of television advertising, for example, Weprin (2015) reports that network owners arguing for ag-

gregating audiences across their outlets is “a theme that became particularly prevalent last year, with programmers
pitching all of their channels together in big ad deals, rather than focusing on individual channels.” See also Geskey
(2016, p. 525), WARC (2001), Patel (2015), and Garland (2002).

14

holds in any equilibrium, though our results do not guarantee existence of an equilibrium in this
case.
Alternative market institutions.

In the model, we assume that owners simultaneously post

prices. In practice, ad sales can take different forms including bargaining and auctioning. Appendix A.3 shows that incremental pricing holds if owners bargain with advertisers a la Nash-inNash (Lee, Whinston, and Yurukoglu 2021), or compete via reserve prices in first-price auctions.
Ad effectiveness and partially increasing returns.

We assume that the value function V (·) is

commonly known. If instead advertisers are uncertain about the returns to their advertisements
(Aral 2021), we can instead interpret V (·) as an expected return. We also assume that V (·) is
submodular, which implies a form of diminishing returns. Appendix A.3 extends the comparative
statics in Section 2.2 to a setting in which there are increasing returns to advertising at small
numbers of impressions (as in, e.g., Dubé, Hitsch, and Manchanda 2005).
Heterogeneous advertisers. In the model, we assume that all advertisers have the same value
function. In practice, different advertisers can have different values for the same set of outlets.
If owners can post advertiser-specific prices, then the result is parallel to that in Theorem 1 in
the sense that each advertiser pays each owner its own incremental value for the owner’s outlets.
If owners cannot post advertiser-specific prices, Appendix A.3 shows that incremental pricing
holds if heterogeneity among the advertisers is sufficiently small, in a precise sense, compared to
the incremental value of a single outlet. When heterogeneity among the advertisers is large and
advertiser-specific prices are not allowed, an owner might profitably engage in screening and price
discrimination by posting a menu of bundles, and incremental pricing might not hold.
Content pricing. Content owners such as television networks sometimes charge fees to viewers,
either directly via “over the top” subscriptions or indirectly via bundlers like cable networks. The
implications of our model are invariant to including such fees in the owners’ payoffs, provided that
the fees are invariant to the outcome of the advertising game. This would be true if, for example,
fees to viewers are set prior to the advertising game, or prior to viewers’ knowledge of its outcome.
Ad inventory and endogenous response of viewers. In the viewer-level model, viewers’ choices
of which outlets to view are not affected by the outcome of the game. We may interpret this ei15

ther as a scenario in which viewers do not care about advertising or, following Anderson, Foros,
and Kind (2018), as a scenario in which viewers make viewing decisions without knowing the
outcome of the game. Appendix A.3 shows that our model can accommodate settings in which
viewers care about advertising and make viewing decisions knowing the outcome of the advertising game provided that the impact of advertising on viewing is additively separable across ad slots.
When this assumption is violated, an owner might profitably withhold some ad slots to increase
the viewership of the remaining ad slots.

3

Data

We conduct our main analysis of the television market using data from 2015. Here we describe
the concepts we measure for 2015. For sensitivity analysis and extensions we use data from 2014
through 2019, with concepts defined and calculated in an analogous manner to those we describe
below for 2015. Appendix Figure 1 reports sensitivity analysis replacing data from 2015 with data
from 2014 or 2016.
3.1

Television Advertising Prices, Audience, and Ownership

We obtain data on broadcast and cable television viewership and advertisement pricing in 2015
from Nielsen’s Ad Intel product (The Nielsen Company 2019). For each advertisement the data
includes the telecast (e.g., NBC Nightly News, June 1), program (e.g., NBC Nightly News), daypart (e.g., early fringe), and network (e.g., NBC). It also includes the duration (e.g., 30 seconds)
of the advertising spot, an estimate of its cost, and an estimate of the number of impressions (live
viewers) for the associated telecast. We omit from all calculations any advertisements with zero
cost or duration. We standardize the cost to a 30-second-spot basis by dividing the cost by the
duration of the advertisement (in seconds) and multiplying by 30.
Advertising cost estimates in the AdIntel data are based primarily on information obtained from
SQAD at the month-network-daypart level for cable television and from networks at the monthprogram level for broadcast television (The Nielsen Company 2017).13 For consistency we define
our notion of an outlet j to be a network-daypart.14 Appendix Figure 2 reports results when using
13 Hristakeva and Mortimer (forthcoming) use data from SQAD to analyze price dispersion and discounting in the

television advertising market.
14 In cases where a telecast spans multiple dayparts, we assign it to the daypart that contains the largest share of

broadcast time.

16

network as our notion of an outlet, and also (for broadcast television) when using program.
For each outlet, we calculate total impressions across all advertisements and divide by the number of hours in the corresponding daypart in a 52-week year to get a measure of total impressions
per hour, which we may think of as an outlet-level analogue λ j of the concept λZ defined in Section
2.2. For each outlet, we also calculate the total (standardized) cost of all advertisements and divide
by the number of hours in the corresponding daypart in a 52-week year to get a measure of total
cost per hour, which we may think of as an outlet-level analogue p∗j of the concept p∗Z defined in
Section 2.2. Finally, for each outlet we divide total cost per hour by total impressions per hour to
obtain the average price per impression of a 30-second spot on the outlet, which we may think of
as an outlet-level analogue p∗j /λ j of the concept p∗Z /λZ defined in Section 2.2.
For each advertisement we also have information on the number of impressions by age (in
bins) and gender for the associated telecast.15 From this information we compute the share of
each outlet’s impressions that are to adults (aged 18 and over) and the share among impressions to
adults that are to females. We also compute the average age of each outlet’s adult impressions by
imputing each bin to its midpoint value and imputing the oldest bin (65+) to age 75.16
For a subset of advertisements representing 99.9 percent of all impressions, we also have information on the distribution of impressions across household income bins for the associated program.17 From this information we compute the average household income of each outlet’s adult
impressions (among those for which we measure income) by imputing each bin to its midpoint
value, and imputing the highest-income bin ($125,000+) to $175,000.
We obtain from SNL Kagan, a product of S&P Global Market Intelligence, information on the
ownership of cable networks in 2015 (S&P Global Market Intelligence 2019). We supplement this
with other publicly available information, including on the owners of broadcast networks. We form
the ownership partition Z by assigning each outlet to its majority owner, treating joint ventures as
independent ownership groups. We perform analogous calculations to those at the outlet level to
compute the price per impression p∗Z /λZ and audience demographics of each owner Z ∈ Z.
15 The age bins are 2-5, 6-8, 9-11, 12-14, 15-17, 18-20, 21-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40-44, 45-49, 50-54, 55-64, and

65+ years.
16 Using information on each advertisement’s advertiser, we also compute the share of each outlet’s adult impressions

that are to advertisements in each of a set of industry categories, which we use in sensitivity analysis.
17 The bins are 0-20, 20-30, 30-40, 40-50, 50-60, 60-75, 75-100, 100-125, and 125+, all in thousands of dollars. For

programs representing 96.2 percent of all impressions, we have information on the distribution of impressions across
household income bins for each month, from which we compute an annual average for the program. For programs
representing 3.7 percent of all impressions, we have information on the distribution of impressions across household
income bins for each of a subset of the program’s telecasts, from which we compute an average for the program. We
associate each advertisement with the average distribution of impressions for its respective program.

17

3.2

Audience Survey

From GfK MRI’s 2015 Survey of the American Consumer we obtain, for each of 23978 adult
respondents, information on times of day spent watching television in the form of a week-long
diary, as well as the implied total weekly television viewing time (GfK Mediamark Research and
Intelligence 2017). We compute a measure of each respondent’s total viewing time in each daypart
by allocating viewing time in each time slot to AdIntel dayparts in proportion to the share of the
time slot that is contained within each daypart. We also obtain measures of each respondent’s
viewership of each of 227 broadcast television programs,18 and time spent watching each of 115
cable television networks in the preceding week. We successfully match 173 broadcast programs
and 97 cable television networks to their counterparts in AdIntel.19
We use the data on viewership by daypart, broadcast program, and cable network to construct a
measure of the time that each respondent i viewed each outlet (network-daypart) j. To do this, we
first allocate the viewing time of broadcast programs to their respective network-dayparts.20 If in
a given daypart there is viewing time that cannot be attributed to broadcast programs, we allocate
that time to the cable networks in proportion to the respondent’s reported viewing time of each
network.21
We thus arrive at a measure Ti j of the time each respondent i viewed each outlet j. We compute
each respondent’s total weekly viewing time by summing over outlets. For each outlet j, we
compute the weighted average log of total weekly viewing time of its viewers, weighting each
viewer by her viewing time on outlet j.22 We treat average log total weekly viewing time as a
18 The data record the number of times a respondent watches a broadcast program in a typical week (for some broadcast

programs) or month (for others). We convert the latter into weekly viewing by allocating monthly viewing time
evenly across weeks.
19 The broadcast programs we match span 6 networks. Some programs (e.g., those on PBS) and some cable television
networks (e.g., the Disney Channel, QVC) are excluded from AdIntel because they do not carry standard advertising
spots.
20 Specifically, we associate each program with a network-daypart following the 2014–15 United States Network Television Schedule (Wikipedia 2022). We supplement this source with information from the Sunday News Journal (The
News Journal 2015) and other publicly available information on the program’s network and airtime, and use information on the respondent’s geographic location to adjust for time zones. If the total duration of broadcast programs
allocated to a given daypart exceeds the respondent’s total viewing time of that daypart, we assume that all viewing
during that daypart was to broadcast programs, and we allocate the respondent’s viewing time during that daypart
to broadcast networks in proportion to the respondent’s viewing time of each broadcast network’s programs. We
assume that each broadcast program viewing has the same duration, and choose that duration so that the ratio of
average total broadcast viewing hours and average total cable viewing hours is equal to the one in Nielsen Local TV
View (The Nielsen Company 2021).
21 If the respondent reports zero viewing time for all cable networks, we instead allocate all viewing time during that
daypart to broadcast networks in proportion to the respondent’s viewing time of each network.
22 We exclude from this calculation any respondent with zero total weekly viewing time.

18

measure of the overall activity level of outlet j’s audience.
We also obtain information on each respondent’s gender, age (in bins),23 reported attentiveness
to different broadcast and cable programs, and attitudes towards television advertising. We obtain
information on household income (in bins), which we use in some specifications as a proxy for the
intrinsic value ai in the viewer-level model.24 For 2019, we additionally obtain data on time spent
watching Netflix, which we use in counterfactual analysis.

4

Evidence on the Determinants of Advertising Prices

Proposition 1 predicts that more active audiences will command a lower advertising price per
impression. Figure 2 shows that this prediction is borne out in a comparison of television outlets.
Each panel shows a binned scatterplot of an outlet’s log(price per impression) against the average
log(weekly viewing time) of the outlet’s audience. Panel A includes baseline controls including
for daypart; Panel B additionally includes controls for log(impressions per hour).
Both panels of Figure 2 show a clear negative relationship between log(price per impression)
and average log(weekly viewing time). The magnitude of the relationship is large: in Panel B, for
example, moving from the bottom to the top decile of average log(weekly viewing time) corresponds to a decline in log(price per impression) of roughly 163 log points.
Proposition 1 also makes predictions about which demographic groups should command a
price premium in the advertising market. Appendix Figure 4 shows that older viewers watch more
television than younger viewers and that female viewers watch more television than male viewers.
The logic of Proposition 1 would lead us to expect that outlets with an older audience would
command a lower advertising price than outlets with a younger audience, and likewise for outlets
with a more female audience. Figure 3 shows that these predictions are borne out in the data:
outlets with older, more female audiences tend to exhibit both lower log(price per impression) and
higher average log(weekly viewing time). The price differences between outlets with different
demographics are large.
Proposition 2 predicts that outlets with a larger audience will command a higher advertising
23 The age bins are 18, 19, 20, 21, 22-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40-44, 45-49, 50-54, 55-59, 60-64, 65-69, 70-74, and

75+ years. We impute each individual’s age to the midpoint of the corresponding bin, imputing the highest bin to
77.
24 The household income bins are 0-4999, 5000-9999, 10000-14999, 15000-19999, 20000-24999, 25000-29999,
30000-34999, 35000-39999, 40000-44999, 45000-49999, 50000-59999, 60000-74999, 75000-99999, 100000149999, 150000-199999, 200000-249999, and 250000+ US dollars. We impute each household’s income to the
midpoint of the corresponding bin, imputing the highest bin to $300,000.

19

price per impression. Figure 4 shows that this prediction is borne out in the data. Panel A shows
a binned scatterplot of log(price per impression) against log(impressions per hour) with baseline
controls. Panel B additionally controls for average log(weekly viewing time). Both plots show
that a larger audience is associated with a higher price per impression, consistent with the logic of
Proposition 2. The association is economically meaningful: in Panel B, for example, moving from
the bottom to the top decile of log(impressions per hour) corresponds to an increase in log(price
per impression) of roughly 37 log points.
Columns (1) and (2) of Table 1 summarize the patterns in Figures 2, 3, and 4. Table 1 and Appendix Figure 3 report results controlling for the average household income of an outlet’s audience.
Appendix Figure 3 additionally shows sensitivity to controlling for measures of the attentiveness
to television and attitudes toward advertising of the outlet’s audience,25 and the industry mix of the
outlet’s advertisers.

25 McGranaghan, Liaukonyte, and Wilbur (2022) find that younger audiences pay less attention to television advertising

than older audiences. Alwitt and Prabhaker (1994) find that demographic characteristics are not strong predictors of
attitudes toward television advertising.

20

Figure 2: Advertising Prices and Audience Activity Levels of Television Outlets
Panel A: Not controlling for impressions

log(price per impression)

−4.5

−5.0

−5.5

−6.0

−6.5

3.4

3.6

3.8

4.0

4.2

log(weekly viewing time of audience)

Panel B: Controlling for impressions

log(price per impression)

−4.5

−5.0

−5.5

−6.0

−6.5

3.4

3.6

3.8

4.0

4.2

log(weekly viewing time of audience)
Notes: Each plot is a binned scatterplot of a dependent variable against an independent variable of interest. To construct
each plot, we regress the dependent variable on indicators for deciles of the independent variable of interest and a set
of controls. The unit of analysis in the regression is an outlet. The y-axis values in the plot are the coefficients on
the decile indicators, recentered by adding a scalar so that their mean value is equal to the sample mean value of the
dependent variable. The x-axis values in the plot are the mean values of the independent variable of interest within the
corresponding decile. In both plots, the dependent variable is the log(price per impression) of a 30-second spot on the
outlet; the independent variable of interest is the weighted average log(weekly viewing time) of the outlet’s viewers;
and the controls include the share of the outlet’s impressions that are to adults, and indicators for the outlet’s daypart.
In Panel B, the controls additionally include deciles for the outlet’s log(impressions per hour).

21

Figure 3: Advertising Prices and Activity Levels by Audience Demographics of Television Outlets
log(price per impression)
of outlet’s ads

log(weekly viewing hours)
of outlet’s viewers
3.90

log(weekly viewing time of audience)

log(price per impression)

−5.25

−5.50

−5.75

−6.00

3.85

3.80

3.75

3.70

3.65
−6.25

40

50

60

40

Average age

50

60

Average age
3.90

log(weekly viewing time of audience)

log(price per impression)

−5.25

−5.50

−5.75

−6.00

3.85

3.80

3.75

3.70

3.65
−6.25

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

0.2

Share female among adults

0.4

0.6

0.8

Share female among adults

Notes: Each plot is a binned scatterplot of a dependent variable against an independent variable of interest. To construct
each plot, we regress the dependent variable on indicators for deciles of the independent variable of interest and a set
of controls. The unit of analysis in the regression is an outlet. The y-axis values in the plot are the coefficients on
the decile indicators, recentered by adding a scalar so that their mean value is equal to the sample mean value of the
dependent variable. The x-axis values in the plot are the mean values of the independent variable of interest within
the corresponding decile. In all plots, controls include the share of the outlet’s impressions that are to adults, and
indicators for the outlet’s daypart. In the upper row of plots, the independent variable of interest is the average age of
the outlet’s adult impressions, and the controls additionally include indicators for deciles of the share of the outlet’s
adult impressions that are to females. In the lower row of plots, the independent variable of interest is the share of
the outlet’s adult impressions that are to females, and the controls additionally include indicators for deciles of the
average age of the outlet’s adult impressions. In the left column of plots, the dependent variable is the log(price per
impression) of a 30-second spot on the outlet. In the right column of plots, the dependent variable is the weighted
average log(weekly viewing time) of the outlet’s viewers.

22

Figure 4: Advertising Prices and Audience Size of Television Outlets

log(price per impression)

Panel A: Not controlling for viewing time of outlet’s audience

−5.3

−5.5

−5.7

−5.9
12

14

16

18

log(impressions per hour)

log(price per impression)

Panel B: Controlling for viewing time of outlet’s audience

−5.3

−5.5

−5.7

−5.9
12

14

16

18

log(impressions per hour)
Notes: Each plot is a binned scatterplot of a dependent variable against an independent variable of interest. To construct
each plot, we regress the dependent variable on indicators for deciles of the independent variable of interest and a set
of controls. The unit of analysis in the regression is an outlet. The y-axis values in the plot are the coefficients on
the decile indicators, recentered by adding a scalar so that their mean value is equal to the sample mean value of the
dependent variable. The x-axis values in the plot are the mean values of the independent variable of interest within
the corresponding decile. In both plots, the dependent variable is the log(price per impression) of a 30-second spot on
the outlet; the independent variable of interest is the log(impressions per hour) of the outlet; and the controls include
the share of the outlet’s impressions that are to adults, and indicators for the outlet’s daypart. In Panel B, the controls
additionally include deciles for the weighted average log(weekly viewing time) of the outlet’s viewers.

23

Table 1: Advertising Prices, Audience Demographics, and Audience Activity Levels of Television Outlets

Dependent variable:

Average log(weekly viewing hours) of audience
Average age of impressions
Share female among adult impressions
24

log(impressions per hour)
Average household income of impressions
($1000)
Number of networks
Number of network-dayparts

Observed
log(price per impression)
(1)

(2)

-1.5556
(0.2913)

.
.

.
.
.
.

0.0973
(0.0292)
0.0124
(0.0031)

-0.0285
(0.0079)
-0.4690
(0.2599)
0.1221
(0.0306)
0.0152
(0.0034)

103
809

103
809

Predicted
log(price per viewer)
Value homog.
Value prop. to income
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
-1.6799
(0.0607)

.
.

-1.8388
(0.1027)

-0.0028
.
(0.0024)
.
-0.3056
.
(0.0933)
.
0.0082
0.0418
0.0198
(0.0044) (0.0109) (0.0075)
0.0002
0.0057
0.0102
(0.0004) (0.0016) (0.0008)
.
.
.
.

103
809

103
809

103
809

.
.

-0.0020
(0.0029)
-0.5230
(0.1228)
0.0628
(0.0125)
0.0152
(0.0018)
103
809

Notes: Each column reports estimates of a linear regression. The unit of analysis is an outlet (network-daypart). In columns (1) and (2), the dependent
variable is the log(price per impression) of a 30-second spot observed in the data, as described in Section 3.1. In columns (3) through (6) the dependent
variable is the log(price per viewer) predicted by the model, as described in Section 5. Columns (3) and (4) use log(price per viewer) predicted from
the baseline model in which advertisers’ value of a first impression is homogeneous across viewers. Columns (5) and (6) use log(price per viewer)
predicted from the model in which advertisers’ value of a first impression is proportional to a viewer’s income. All models include controls for
the share of the outlet’s impressions that are to adults, and indicators for the outlet’s daypart. The sample includes only those outlets for which all
variables are available. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by network.

5

Quantification and Applications of the Model

5.1

Implementation and Model Fit

Corollary 1 shows that, in the reach-only model, it is possible to calculate the equilibrium price
per viewer p∗Z /λZ given data on the probability ηi j that each viewer i sees ads on each outlet
j, the intrinsic value ai of each viewer i, and the ownership partition Z. We operationalize this
calculation in the audience survey data, letting the viewers I be the set of respondents. For each
viewer i ∈ I, we take ηi j = Ti j /T j where T j is outlet j’s total broadcast time and we recall that Ti j
is the time that viewer i spends viewing outlet j. We implement two specifications, a specification
in which ai = a for all i, and a specification in which ai is proportional to household income for all
1
i. We treat the value |I|
∑i∈I ai of reaching an average viewer as an unknown scale normalization,

and therefore do not use any data on advertising prices in calculating the price per viewer predicted
by the model. We perform inference via a nonparametric bootstrap over survey respondents with
100 replicates.
Figure 5 shows that the model does a good job predicting relative advertising prices across
owners of television networks. Panel A shows a scatterplot of the observed log(price per impression) against the predicted log(price per viewer) for the specification with homogeneous values.
Predicted log(price per viewer) explains 35.1 percent of the variation in observed log(price per impression). Panel B shows the analogous scatterplot for the specification with values proportional
to household income. Predicted log(price per viewer) explains 34.0 percent of the variation in observed log(price per impression). In the latter case, the slope of the relationship between observed
and predicted prices is close to 1. Across both specifications, the model is able to rationalize large
differences in advertising prices between owners, as illustrated in the x-axes of the scatterplots.
Appendix Table 1 evaluates the restrictiveness (Fudenberg, Gao, and Liang 2023) and completeness (Fudenberg et al. 2022) of the economic model. The restrictiveness measures the difficulty of fitting arbitrary data, and in this sense can be thought of as a measure of parsimony. Panel
A shows that the economic model is highly restrictive. This is because the economic model has no
free parameters that are fit to the observed price per impression. The completeness measures the
model’s success in capturing the systematic patterns in the data. Panel B shows that, despite being
highly restrictive, the economic model outperforms both a simple regression model and a richly
parameterized machine-learning model.

25

Figure 5: Observed and Predicted Television Advertising Prices

log(price per impression), observed

Panel A: Baseline model with homogeneous value
CW Owner

−4

Slope = 1.732
(0.156)
R 2 = 0.351
(0.044)

CBS Corporation
21st Century Fox
Walt Disney Co.
Comcast Corporation
National Football League

−5

Time Warner Inc.

Major League Baseball

Scripps Networks Interactive

National Basketball Association

Hearst Corp. − Walt Disney Co. JV Discovery Comm. Inc.
Discovery Comm. Inc. − Harpo JV Rural Media Group Inc. Viacom Inc.
AMC Networks Inc. BBC
MET Owner
Crown Media Holdings Qatar Media Holdings

BOU Owner

−6

Ovation TV Owner

Hubbard Broadcasting Inc.
Radio One

Fuse Media Inc.
Kroenke Sports & Ent., LLC

The Weather Channel Owner

Sony Corp.

Lions Gate Ent. Corp. − CBS Corp. JV

Inspiration Ministries
Tribune Company
ION Owner
UP (Formerly: GMC) Owner

−7
−6.5

−6.0

−5.5

−5.0

log(price per viewer), predicted

log(price per impression), observed

Panel B: Model with value proportional to income
CW Owner

−4

Slope = 0.999
(0.073)
R 2 = 0.340
(0.036)

CBS Corporation
21st Century Fox
Walt Disney Co.
Comcast Corporation
National Football League

−5

Major League Baseball
National Basketball Association

Time Warner Inc.

Scripps Networks Interactive
Hearst Corp. − Walt Disney Co. JV
Discovery Comm. Inc.
Rural Media Group Inc.
Viacom Inc.
Discovery Comm. Inc. − Harpo JV AMC Networks Inc.
MET Owner

Crown Media Holdings

Radio One

−6

BBC

Qatar Media Holdings
Ovation TV Owner

BOU Owner
Hubbard Broadcasting Inc.
Lions Gate Ent. Corp. − CBS Corp. JV

Fuse Media Inc.
The Weather Channel Owner
Kroenke Sports & Ent., LLC

Inspiration Ministries

Sony Corp.
Tribune Company

UP (Formerly: GMC) Owner

ION Owner

−7
−6.5

−6.0

−5.5

−5.0

log(price per viewer), predicted
Notes: Each plot is a scatterplot of the log(price per impression) of a 30-second spot observed in the data (y-axis), as
described in Section 3.1, against the log(price per viewer) predicted by the model (x-axis), as described in Section 5.
Panel A uses log(price per viewer) predicted from the baseline model in which advertisers’ value of a first impression
is homogeneous across viewers. Panel B uses log(price per viewer) predicted from the model in which advertisers’
value of a first impression is proportional to a viewer’s income. The unit of analysis is an owner Z. Variables are
residualized with respect to the share of the owner’s impressions that are to adults and recentered by adding a scalar so
that the mean value of each recentered variable is equal to the sample mean of the log(price per impression) observed
in the data. The dashed line depicts a 45-degree line. The solid line depicts the line of best fit. The box reports the
slope of the line of best fit and the R2 of the associated linear model, with standard errors in parentheses obtained via
a nonparametric bootstrap over survey respondents with 100 replicates.

26

Appendix Figure 5 shows that moderate departures from perfect diminishing returns have little effect on the share of variation in log(price per impression) that is explained by variation in
predicted log(price per viewer), but lead predicted log(price per viewer) to underpredict the extent
of price differences across owners. Under our other maintained assumptions Appendix Figure 5
suggests that diminishing returns are strong. If diminishing returns are instead weak, Appendix
Figure 5 suggests that there are forces outside the model that explain variation in log(price per
impression) and that are correlated with predicted log(price per viewer).
We can also evaluate the fit of the model to trends in television advertising revenues during
recent years in which overall television viewership has fallen. Panel A of Figure 6 shows that
annual revenues increased slightly between 2014 and 2019 even as total impressions fell, a pattern
that some have regarded as puzzling (The Economist 2021). Panel B shows that our baseline
model predicts this pattern. In the model, a decline in impressions can increase the value captured
by television owners if it results in less overlap in audience across owners. Panel B shows that the
model indeed predicts an increase in the price per impression, and in revenues, over this period.
The patterns in Panel B provide a reasonable qualitative and quantitative match to those in Panel A,
even though the revenue calculations underlying Panel B are based only on audience survey data,
and in particular do not use any information on advertising prices.26 Competition is important
for the findings in Panel B of Figure 6: with a single monopoly owner of television networks,
our model predicts declining, rather than increasing, advertising revenue over the period we study.
Diminishing returns also appear to be important for the findings in Panel B of Figure 6: Appendix
A.4 shows that two alternative models without diminishing returns can generate increasing prices
but not increasing revenues.

26 The ratio of price per impression in 2019 to price per impression in 2014 is 1.17 in the data and 1.22 (SE = 0.01)

in the model prediction. Appendix Figure 6 includes an alternative version of Panel B in which impressions are
imputed from the audience survey data.

27

Figure 6: Observed and Predicted Television Advertising Revenues
Panel A: Observed trends
Measure
Price per impression
Total impressions
Total revenue

1.2

Normalized value

1.1

1.0

0.9

0.8

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2018

2019

Year

Panel B: Predicted trends
Measure
Price per impression
Total impressions
Total revenue

1.2

Normalized value

1.1

1.0

0.9

0.8

2014

2015

2016

2017

Year

Notes: Each plot depicts trends in the television advertising market over the sample period. We plot trends in total
revenue, total impressions, and price per impression (total revenues divided by total impressions), all normalized
relative to their 2015 value. In Panel A, all series are as observed in the data, as described in Section 3.1, and
revenue is deflated to 2015 dollars using the US Consumer Price Index (Organization for Economic Co-operation and
Development 2022). In Panel B, the trend in revenue is predicted by the baseline model in which advertisers’ value
of a first impression is homogeneous across viewers, as described in Section 5; the trend in impressions is identical to
that in Panel A; and the price per impression is the ratio of the two.

28

5.2

Implications for Demographic Premia

The model allows us to quantify the effects of competition on the incentives of network owners to
attract different kinds of audience members. Following Corollary 1, the contribution of viewer i to
the revenue of owner Z is given by
p∗iZ = ai ηiZ ∏ (1 − ηiZ 0 ) .
Z 0 6=Z

Motivated by this observation we can define the television market’s total marginal willingness to
pay per impression to attract viewer i,
∑Z∈Z p∗iZ
.
mi =
∑Z∈Z ηiZ
Appendix A.3 relates p∗iZ to the marginal willingness to pay of owner Z to attract a viewer i in a
model with a content investment stage.
Figure 7 depicts the average estimated value of ln (mi ) across viewers i in different age categories under different ownership partitions, including the factual partition (“baseline”), a counterfactual partition in which a single owner owns all networks (“concentrated”), and counterfactual
partitions in between “baseline” and “concentrated” in which the top two, three, or four owners
by audience are merged. Panel A uses the model in which advertisers’ value ai is homogeneous
across viewers; Panel B uses the model in which ai is proportional to viewer i’s household income.
In each panel, we normalize the reported average estimated value of ln (mi ) to be relative to the
average value for the youngest age group. Therefore, y-axis values can be read as differences in
the log of the market’s willingness to pay per impression for viewers in a given age group relative
to those of the youngest group.
Figure 7 shows that, under the factual ownership partition, willingness to pay per impression
is 82.8 (Panel A, SE = 3.21) or 88.8 (Panel B, SE = 4.38) log points lower to attract the average
member of the oldest group than to attract the average member of the youngest group. These
differences attenuate with reduced competition, down to 0 (Panel A, SE = 0) or 6.0 (Panel B,
SE = 3.06) under concentrated ownership. Figure 7 thus suggests that television network owners
would have a stronger incentive to target content to older viewers if the television market were less
competitive.

29

Figure 7: Marginal Willingness to Pay to Attract Older vs. Younger Viewers

Panel A: Baseline model with homogeneous value
log(marginal WTP per impression), normalized

0.5

0.0

−0.5
Ownership
concentrated

baseline

−1.0
18−24

25−34

35−44

45−54

55−64

65+

Age

Panel B: Model with value proportional to income
log(marginal WTP per impression), normalized

0.5

0.0

−0.5
Ownership
concentrated

baseline

−1.0
18−24

25−34

35−44

45−54

55−64

65+

Age

Notes: In each plot, the y-axis value corresponds to the estimated average log(total marginal willingness to pay
per impression), ln (mi ), as described in Section 5.2, for viewers in the age bin listed on the x-axis, under different
ownership scenarios. These scenarios include: the “baseline” ownership corresponding to the observed partition Z;
the “concentrated” ownership corresponding to the counterfactual scenario in which one entity owns all television
networks; and three counterfactual ownership partitions in between, in which the top two, three, or four owners by
audience are merged. Panel A uses the baseline model in which advertisers’ value of a first impression is homogeneous
across viewers. Panel B uses the model in which advertisers’ value of a first impression is proportional to a viewer’s
income. In both plots, darker colors correspond to more concentrated ownership scenarios, and the y-axis value is
normalized by adding a scalar so that its average value is zero in the youngest age group.

30

We can also evaluate the fit of the model to the patterns we documented in Section 4. To do
this, we calculate the predicted price per viewer p∗j /λ j for each outlet, treating outlets as if they
were independently owned. Columns (3) and (4) of Table 1 report estimates of the same regression
models as in columns (1) and (2), replacing the observed log(price per impression) with log(price


∗
per viewer) ln p j /λ j predicted from the model in which advertisers’ value ai is homogeneous
across viewers. The model matches the qualitative patterns in the data well, but predicts weaker
relationships on some dimensions than those observed in the data. Columns (5) and (6) repeat the


exercise in columns (3) and (4), with ln p∗j /λ j predicted from the model where ai is proportional
to viewer i’s household income. This specification’s predictions align better on some dimensions
with the patterns observed in the data. Both specifications underpredict the magnitude of the relationship between price and average age of impressions. A possible interpretation is that audience
age influences advertising prices through other channels in addition to those captured in the model.
5.3

Application to Mergers of Television Network Owners

Figure 8 visualizes the implications, under the model with homogeneous values, of each possible
pairwise merger among the top eight owners of television networks by audience. For each merger,
we calculate the log of the predicted change in revenue, the log of the predicted change in the
Hirschman-Herfindahl index (HHI) of audience shares, and the log of the size of the overlapping
audience between the two merging owners. Panel A plots the log of the predicted change in revenue
against the log of the predicted change in HHI. Panel B plots the log of the predicted change in
revenue against the log of the overlapping audience. In both panels, we normalize the log of the
predicted change in revenue relative to its maximum value, and we highlight three mergers that
occurred after 2015: Discovery and Scripps (2018), CBS and Viacom (2019), Disney and Fox
(2019).

31

Figure 8: Predicted Effects of Mergers on Advertising Revenue

Panel A: Change in revenue vs. change in HHI
log(change in revenue), normalized

0.0
Disney−FOX

−0.5

−1.0
Discovery−Scripps

CBS−Viacom

−1.5
−5.2

−4.8

−4.4

−4.0

log(change in HHI)

Panel B: Change in revenue vs. overlap in audience
log(change in revenue), normalized

0.0
Disney−FOX

−0.5

−1.0
Discovery−Scripps
CBS−Viacom

−1.5
−4.9

−4.5

−4.1

−3.7

log(overlapping audience)
Notes: For each of a set of simulated mergers, Panel A plots the log of the simulated change in revenue (y-axis) against the log of the simulated
change in HHI (x-axis), and Panel B plots the log of the simulated change in revenue (y-axis) against the log of the overlapping audience (x-axis).
Larger, more lightly shaded circles indicate mergers that occurred after 2015; smaller, more darkly shaded circles indicate hypothetical mergers
that have not occurred. We construct the plots as follows. For each owner we compute the audience size as the probability of an average viewer
seeing an ad on at least one of the owner’s outlets, as described in Section 5. We select the top eight owners by this metric, excluding joint ventures,
and form all possible pairs of these eight. For each pair, we compute the overlapping audience, defined as the share of the audience seeing an ad
on both owners’ outlets. For each pair we also simulate the effect of a pairwise merger on the pair’s total advertising revenue, using our model
of advertising-market equilibrium as described in Section 5. We also simulate the effect of the merger on the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI),
where the HHI is computed with respect to the probability of an average viewer seeing an ad on at least one of the owner’s outlets. We exclude from
the plots any merger that changes the HHI by less than 0.001. For simulated mergers between two owners each of which owns one of the broadcast
networks {ABC, CBS, FOX, NBC}, we exclude one of the two owners’ broadcast networks from the simulated merger and treat it as a separate
entity for all calculations. For mergers that took place we exclude the broadcast network that was excluded in practice; for other mergers we exclude
the broadcast network owned by whichever owner had a smaller total pre-merger audience. We normalize the log of the simulated change in revenue
by subtracting the value for the merger with the largest simulated change in revenue. For the mergers that took place, the normalized log of the
simulated change in revenue is −1.15 for Discovery-Scripps (SE = 0.04), −1.16 for CBS-Viacom (SE = 0.03), and −0.12 for Disney-FOX (SE =
0), where standard errors in parentheses are obtained via a nonparametric bootstrap over survey respondents with 100 replicates.

32

Comparing Panels A and B of Figure 8 shows that, according to the model, the revenue effects
of a given merger are more strongly related to the overlap in audience between the merging entities
than to the change in HHI induced by the merger. Among the three mergers that occurred, for
example, the CBS-Viacom merger is roughly midway between the Discovery-Scripps merger and
the Disney-Fox merger in terms of its log impact on HHI, but is much closer to the DiscoveryScripps merger in terms of both the log of audience overlap and the log of the predicted revenue
impact.27
5.4

Application to Netflix Carrying Advertising

In 2022, Netflix launched a new service tier that carries advertising (Krouse 2022). Figure 9 visualizes the implications, under the model with homogeneous values, for television network owners
of Netflix counterfactually adding advertising to its platform in 2019, assuming no change in audience behavior and that Netflix shows advertisements across all of its content and subscribers.
Across the owners, we estimate that Netflix ad carriage would reduce the price per viewer by between 0.38 and 2.7 log points, with a mean reduction of 1.68 (SE = 0.05).28 As the plot illustrates,
owners whose outlets have greater audience overlap with Netflix tend to experience greater proportional declines in price per viewer in this counterfactual, though there is substantial variation in
the effect of Netflix for a given level of audience overlap, owing to variation across owners in the
overlap of their outlets’ audience with that of other owners. Our estimates imply that Netflix itself
would have a relatively high price per impression—about 24.4 log points larger than the average
of the five largest TV owners—consistent with its relatively young audience.

27 Prat and Valletti (2022, Section 4) also simulate effects of platform mergers under various assumptions about overlap

in their audience. In their setting, mergers impact ad prices through changes in the quantity of ad slots available, and
audience overlap affects the revenue impact of a merger through product market interactions between advertisers. In
contrast, our baseline model features a fixed quantity of ad slots and no interactions between advertisers outside of
the advertising market.
28 Dividing the total daily US Netflix viewing minutes implied by values reported in MoffettNathanson (2022, Exhibit
11), assuming a 30.5-day average month, by the 2020 US Population (U.S. Census Bureau 2021) yields daily viewing
of 22.7 minutes per capita, close to the average of 24.4 that we calculate from the audience survey data. If, due to
coviewing and other factors, Netflix viewing time is larger than what we estimate, then we expect our calculations
to understate the effect of Netflix ad carriage on advertising prices.

33

Figure 9: Predicted Effect of Netflix Advertising on Advertising Prices

0.00

Change in predicted log(price per viewer)

Inspiration Ministries

Rural Media Group Inc.

Sony Corp.

−0.01

Hubbard Broadcasting Inc.

Nexstar Media Group

beIN Media Group

MET Owner
Sinclair Broadcasting Group, Inc.

El Rey Network Owner

Hallmark Cards Inc.
Fox Corporation

Major League Baseball

Urban One Inc.
Ovation TV Owner

Entertainment Studios Inc.
ION Owner

Fuse Media Inc.

Hearst Corp.

HDNet LLC

−0.02

CBS Corporation

Hearst Corp. − Walt Disney Co. JV
AT&T Inc.

BABY Owner

Walt Disney Co.

Discovery Comm. Inc.
Comcast Corporation

AMC Networks Inc.
CW Owner

UP (Formerly: GMC) Owner

BBC
National Basketball Association
Viacom Inc.
National Football League
VICE Media LLC

−0.03
−12

−10

−8

−6

log(overlapping audience)

Notes: The plot shows a scatterplot, across owners of television networks, of the change in the owner’s log(price
per viewer) predicted by the model if Netflix were to carry ads (y-axis), against the log of the overlapping audience
between the owner’s audience and Netflix’s audience (x-axis). To construct the plot, we compile audience data from
GfK MRI’s 2019 Survey of the American Consumer (GfK Mediamark Research and Intelligence 2021), analogous
to the data described in Section 3.2 for the 2015 survey, and treating Netflix as an additional television outlet. To
calculate the probability of a viewer seeing an ad spot on Netflix, we divide the number of hours the viewer reports
spending watching Netflix over the last seven days (topcoded at 21 hours) by the number of hours in the week. We
compute the difference in log(price per viewer) implied by the baseline model in which advertisers’ value of a first
impression is homogeneous across viewers, as described in Section 5, between the scenarios with and without Netflix
included in the advertising market (y-axis). We also compute the log of the share of the television audience seeing an
ad on both the given owner’s outlets and Netflix (x-axis).

34

6

Extension to Social Media

Here we extend our analysis of the television advertising market to incorporate the social media
advertising market.
6.1

Model

We first generalize the model in Section 2 to allow a subset of owners to post viewer-specific
advertising prices. Suppose that there are viewers i ∈ I and that a subset Z̃ ⊆ Z of owners can post
viewer-specific prices for each bundle of its outlets. Suppose that the advertisers’ value function
V (·) = ∑i∈I Vi (·), where Vi (·) is the value function if viewer i were the only viewer, and viB =
Vi (J ) −Vi (J \B) is the viewer-specific incremental value of bundle B.
Proposition 3. Suppose that Vi (·) is monotone and submodular and that vi j > 0 for all i and j.
Then there exists an equilibrium. In any equilibrium, for any viewer i, all advertisers buy slots on
all outlets owned by the owners in Z̃, and the payment by each advertiser to each owner Z ∈ Z̃ is
given by p∗iZ = viZ . Moreover, in any equilibrium, the outcome for the outlets owned by the owners
in Z \ Z̃ is identical to that in Theorem 1.
In the setting of Proposition 3, the owners in Z̃ are indifferent between selling the ad slots at the
outlet level or at the viewer level because the advertisers are homogeneous. If the incremental value
of each viewer could differ across advertisers, then the owners might benefit from viewer-level ad
pricing and targeting.
For our empirical analysis, we consider the following special case of the setting of Proposition
3, analogous to the reach-only model in the single-format case.
Definition. (Cross-format reach-only model.) In the cross-format reach-only model, owners are
partitioned into two formats, 1 and 2, corresponding to the sets Z̃ and Z \ Z̃, respectively. Advertisers’ valuations follow the viewer-level model where u (M) depends on M only via (1M1 >0 , 1M2 >0 )
and u (M) is invariant to exchanging the elements of M.
In the cross-format reach-only model, there are two formats, with owners in one format (e.g.,
social media) able to post viewer-specific prices and one format (e.g., television) unable to do so.
An advertiser’s value from a given viewer is determined by whether that viewer sees its ad at least
once on each format, with no incremental return to multiple impressions on a given format. In this

35

case, it is without loss of generality to write that
u (M1 , M2 ) = 1M1 >0 + 1M2 >0 − φ 1M1 M2 >0
where φ ∈ [0, 1] is a parameter. When φ = 0 diminishing returns operate only within and not
between formats. When φ = 1 the distinction between formats is irrelevant. We can characterize
pricing in this model via the following generalization of Corollary 1.
Corollary 2. In the cross-format reach-only model the equilibrium revenue p∗Z of owner Z is given
by p∗Z = ∑i∈I p∗iZ for
"
p∗iZ = ai ηiZ

!!
1−φ

1−

∏

(1 − ηiZ 0 )

Z 0 ∈Z\F(Z)

#

∏

(1 − ηiZ 0 )

Z 0 ∈F(Z)\{Z}

the equilibrium revenue from viewer i, where F (Z) is the set of owners sharing the same format
as owner Z and where ηiZ is defined as in the reach-only model. For an owner Z ∈ Z̃ the price
per impression for viewer i is p∗iZ /ηiZ , whereas for an owner Z ∈
/ Z̃ the price per viewer is p∗Z /λZ ,
with λZ defined as in the reach-only model.
We will apply the cross-format model to the case of television and social media in the mid2010s. Although we do not take a strong a priori stand on the strength of cross-format diminishing
returns, i.e., on the value of the parameter φ , we think it is plausible that φ ∈ (0, 1) during the
period we study. Advertisers coordinate campaigns across television and social media, and industry
sources suggest that advertisers are attentive to audience overlap when they do.29 These facts
suggest that φ > 0. At the same time, industry sources suggest that television and social media
ads tend to serve different functions, with the former best suited to “top of funnel” brand building
strategies and social media ads best suited to “low funnel” activities like acquiring customers and
inducing immediate purchases (e.g., The Nielsen Company 2018, p. 38). Correspondingly, ads on
social media often come in the form of product images or very short videos, in contrast to television
ads which tend to be 30-second video spots.30 The growth in television advertising revenue during
a period of rapid expansion in social media advertising further suggests that advertisers do not view
29 Facebook tells advertisers that “Nielsen’s Total Ad Ratings (TAR) helps you see who you’re reaching across TV and

Facebook. It also helps you identify overlap in the audience seeing your ads. This can then help you determine how
to optimize your campaigns more effectively and efficiently” (Facebook 2018).
30 As of 2016, only 9.7 percent of digital ad spending went to video ads (MoffettNathanson 2017, Exhibit 3). Facebook
only introduced embeddable videos in 2015 (MoffettNathanson 2017, Exhibit 23).

36

the two formats as serving identical functions.31 All of these facts suggest that φ < 1.
Importantly, Corollary 2 implies that the cross-format reach-only model inherits the comparative statics of Section 2.2. Specifically, say that an individual i is more active than an individual i0
if ηiZ ≥ ηi0 Z for all Z ∈ Z. We then have the following.
Corollary 3. In the cross-format reach-only model, if individual i is more active than individual
i0 , then p∗iZ /ηiZ ≤ p∗i0 Z /ηi0 Z for all Z ∈ Z̃.
6.2

Data

Social Media Advertising Prices
We obtain data on the cost of advertising to different audiences on Facebook via an original experiment conducted for this study and a separate advertising campaign conducted for a different study
(Allcott et al. 2020a). In both cases advertisements were placed through Facebook’s Ad Manager.
In the Facebook advertisement structure, an advertisement set is a group of one or more advertisements with a defined audience target, budget, schedule, bidding, and placement. An advertising
campaign is a group of one or more advertisement sets corresponding to a single campaign objective (Facebook 2022). All advertisements targeted English speakers in the United States.
For our experiment, we administered an advertising campaign from July 15, 2017 through July
22, 2017 in partnership with GiveDirectly. The campaign consisted of 14 separate advertisement
sets targeting each combination of gender and age group in {Men, Women}×
{13-17, 18-24, 25-34, 35-44, 45-54, 55-64, 65+}. Each advertisement set included just one advertisement, with fixed budgets of $20 a day using automated cost-per-click bidding. For each
advertisement set, we obtain the price per impression, which we may think of as a group-level
average of the concept p∗iZ /ηiZ defined in Section 6.1.
From Allcott et al. (2020b), we obtain data from 32 advertisement sets purchased on September
24, 2018: four each targeting each combination of gender and age group in {Men, Women}×
{18-24, 25-44, 45-64, 65+}. We compute the total cost and total number of impressions for each
demographic group, and take the ratio of these to obtain the price per impression.

31 Appendix Figure 7 shows that a model with φ = 1 would predict declining television advertising revenue in recent

years, in contrast to the observed trends, and the predicted trends from a model with φ = 0, depicted in Figure 6.

37

Audience Survey Data
From the 2015 audience survey described in Section 3.2 we obtain information on whether the
respondent visited each of five social media sites—Facebook, Instagram, Reddit, Twitter, and
YouTube—in the preceding 30 days. For each respondent i and social media site j, we let ηi j
be an indicator for whether the respondent visited the site. We treat Facebook and Instagram as
jointly owned and the other social media sites as independently owned, and compute ηiZ following
Corollary 1. We also obtain information on the amount of time each respondent spent using the
internet in an average week.32
6.3

Descriptive Evidence

Whereas older people are the heaviest television viewers, younger people are the heaviest users of
social media. Panel A of Appendix Figure 8 shows that older individuals visit fewer social media
sites. If φ is small, the forces in Corollary 3 would lead us to expect that social media advertising
prices will be increasing in audience age, in contrast to the decreasing pattern we see for television
advertising prices. Panel B of Appendix Figure 8 shows that a similar qualitative pattern to Panel
A obtains for time spent on the internet.
Figure 10 shows that the direction of the age-price gradient is indeed reversed on social media.
This is true both according to data we collected in our own experiment (Panel A) and according to
data collected as part of Allcott et al.’s (2020a) study (Panel B). These differences are large, with
the oldest group commanding a premium of 122 log points (Panel A) or 57 log points (Panel B)
relative to the youngest group, on average across genders. We view this evidence as difficult to
square with some explanations for the differential value of older vs. younger viewers to advertisers,
such as intrinsic differences in the malleability of their preferences (Surowiecki 2002).33 Figure
10 does not show a consistent price premium for advertising to male or female audiences on social
media. Appendix Figure 9 repeats the analysis in Figure 10 using data on price per click rather
than price per impression.

32 This is, in turn, calculated based on reported time spent on three recent days.
33 Smith, Moschis, and Moore (1985) find that older consumers rely more on advertising when making purchasing

decisions than do younger consumers, though DeLorme, Huh, and Reid (2006) find no evidence of age differences
in overall behavioral responses to direct-to-consumer prescription drug advertisements. Lewis and Reiley (2014)
find evidence of large effects of digital advertising on purchases by older individuals.

38

Figure 10: Demographic Premia and Viewing Time on Facebook
Panel A: Data from our experiment

Gender
Men
Women

log(price per impression)

−5.0

−5.4

−5.8

20

30

40

50

60

70

Age

Panel B: Data from Allcott et al. (2020b)
−4.2

Gender

log(price per impression)

Men
Women

−4.4

−4.6

−4.8
20

30

40

50

60

70

Age
Notes: The plot shows the log(price per impression) for advertisement sets targeted to a given gender and
age group. In Panel A, the data are taken from our own experiment, and the groups are {Men, Women} ×
{18-24, 25-34, 35-44, 45-54, 55-64, 65+}. In Panel B, the data are taken from Allcott et al. (2020b), and the groups
are {Men, Women}×{18-24, 25-44, 45-64, 65+}. In both panels, the y-axis value is the log(price per impression) for
advertisement sets targeting the given group, and the x-axis value is the midpoint of the age range for the given group,
treating 70 as the midpoint for ages 65+.

39

Appendix Figure 10 shows the relationship between estimated log(price per impression) of
display advertisements and audience demographics across a sample of platforms. The data on
prices are imputed from a statistical model that is estimated on data from a range of sources (The
Nielsen Company 2017). The data on audience demographics are from the audience survey and do
not reflect viewership intensity. The advertisements in the sample are likely more heterogeneous
than those in our controlled buying experiment. The plots show no clear relationship between price
per impression and the age or gender composition of the platform’s audience.
6.4

Quantification

Figure 11 shows the fit of the model to the patterns in Figure 10 as a function of φ . To produce
the figure, for each value of φ , we calculate the average price per Facebook visitor in each of the
demographic cells in Figure 10 following Corollary 2. Panel A of Figure 11 depicts the fit of the
model as a function of φ , for the values φ ∈ {0, 0.1, ..., 1}. Appendix Figure 11 depicts corresponding patterns for the fit of the model to the observed log(price per impression) for television
owners.
Panel A of Figure 11 shows that the best fit is achieved at φ = 0, but that other low values
of φ achieve a similar fit. Panel B illustrates the fit of the model at the best-fitting value of φ .
The model predicts an even lower price for the youngest group of men, and a more systematic
gender difference, than what is observed in the data. Although our focus is on the implications
of the choice of φ for patterns in pricing across demographic groups, we note that our findings
regarding the degree of substitutability across platforms, as captured in the parameter φ , may be
of independent interest, for example in light of questions about appropriate market definition for
competition policy in advertising markets (Delrahim 2019).

40

Figure 11: Fit of Quantitative Model of Social Media Prices

Baseline model with homogeneous value
Model with value proportional to income
Panel A: Fit of model
1.0
1−

1.0

MSE
Var

1−

0.6

0.6

Fit

0.8

Fit

0.8

MSE
Var

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.0

0.0
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.0

Diminishing returns across formats (φ)

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Diminishing returns across formats (φ)

Panel B: Observed and Predicted Advertising Prices
Gender

Men
Women

−5.0

log(price per impression)

−5.0

log(price per impression)

Gender

Men
Women

−5.5

−6.0

Predicted

−6.5

−5.5

−6.0

Predicted

−6.5

Observed

20

30

40

50

60

Observed

70

20

Age

30

40

50

60

70

Age

Notes: Panel A depicts the fit of a model-based prediction of social media advertising prices (y-axis) as a function
of the strength of cross-format diminishing returns (x-axis). To produce each plot, for each of the demographic cells
depicted in Panel A of Figure 10, and for each value φ ∈ {0, 0.1, ..., 1} of the parameter governing the strength of
cross-format diminishing returns, we calculate the average price per viewer for visitors to Facebook in the given cell
implied by the cross-format reach only model defined in Section 6. For each value of φ , we recenter the predicted
log(average price per viewer) by adding a constant so that the predicted log(average price per viewer) is equal to the
observed log(price per impression) on average across the demographic cells. We then calculate the mean squared error
of the model as the mean of squared deviations between the predicted log(average price per viewer) and the observed
log(price per impression) across the demographic cells. We then plot the fit, given by one minus the ratio of the mean
squared error to the sample variance, against the value of φ . Panel B depicts, for each demographic cell, the observed
log(price per impression) from Panel A of Figure 10, alongside the predicted log(average price per viewer) based on
the value of φ that maximizes the fit. The left column of plots uses log(average price per viewer) predicted from the
baseline model in which advertisers’ value of a first impression is homogeneous across viewers. The right column of
plots uses log(average price per viewer) predicted from the model in which advertisers’ value of a first impression is
proportional to a viewer’s income.

41

7

Conclusions

We extend existing theoretical results on advertising markets with competing outlets and a multihoming audience. Our model predicts that the equilibrium price per viewer that an outlet charges
for its ads is lower the more active is the outlet’s audience. We show that this prediction is borne
out in data on television advertising. A disciplined, quantitative implementation of the model
rationalizes a meaningful portion of the variation in advertising prices across television outlets and
owners, the premia associated with specific demographic groups, and recent trends in television
advertising revenue.
We conclude that the model captures important competitive forces in the advertising market.
We therefore apply the quantitative model to questions of economic and policy interest, including
the effects of mergers of television network owners on advertising prices and the effect of Netflix
ad carriage on linear television advertising prices.
We extend the analysis to social media, where there is a premium to advertise to older viewers.
A model in which diminishing returns are stronger within than between formats can rationalize
this fact.

42

References
AdStage. 2020. Paid Media Q1 2020 Benchmark Report. Report by AdStage (A TopClicks
Company).
Allcott, Hunt, Luca Braghieri, Sarah Eichmeyer, and Matthew Gentzkow. 2020a. “The welfare
effects of social media.” American Economic Review 110(3): 629-676.
Allcott, Hunt, Luca Braghieri, Sarah Eichmeyer, and Matthew Gentzkow. 2020b. “Facebook
campaign data for: The welfare effects of social media.” (accessed February 2019).
Alwitt, Linda F. and Paul R. Prabhaker. 1994. “Identifying who dislikes television advertising:
Not by demographics alone.” Journal of Advertising Research 34(6): 17-29.
Ambrus, Attila, Emilio Calvano, and Markus Reisinger. 2016. “Either or both competition: A
‘two-sided’ theory of advertising with overlapping viewerships.” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 8(3): 189-222.
Ampush. 2014. Mobile Advertising Trends Report: Q3 2014. Report by Ampush.
Anderson, Simon and Stephen Coate. 2005. “Market provision of broadcasting: A welfare analysis.” Review of Economic Studies 72(4): 947-972.
Anderson, Simon, Øystein Foros, and Hans Jarle Kind. 2018. “Competition for advertisers and for
viewers in media markets.” Economic Journal 128(608): 34-54.
Anderson, Simon and Martin Peitz. 2020. “Media see-saws: Winners and losers in platform
markets.” Journal of Economic Theory 186: 104990.
Aral, Sinan. 2021. “What digital advertising gets wrong.” Harvard Business Review, February
19. Accessed at https://web.archive.org/web/20230325071010/https:
//hbr.org/2021/02/what-digital-advertising-gets-wrong on April 19
2023.
Armstrong, Mark and John Vickers. 2022. “Patterns of competitive interaction.” Econometrica
90(1): 153-191.
Athey, Susan, Emilio Calvano, and Joshua S. Gans. 2018. “The impact of consumer multi-homing
on advertising markets and media competition.” Management Science 64(4): 1574-1590.
Bel, Germà and Laia Domènech. 2009. “What influences advertising price in television channels?
An empirical analysis of the Spanish market.” Journal of Media Economics 22: 164-183.
Berry, Steven, Alon Eizenberg, and Joel Waldfogel. 2016. “Optimal product variety in radio
markets.” RAND Journal of Economics 47(3): 463-497.
Chandra, Ambarish and Ulrich Kaiser. 2014. “Targeted advertising in magazine markets and the
advent of the internet.” Management Science 60(7): 1829-1843.
Chwe, Michael Suk-Young. 1998. “Believe the hype: solving coordination problems with television advertising.” University of Chicago Working Paper. Accessed at https://www.ch

43

we.net/michael/h.pdf on July 5 2021.
Competition and Markets Authority. 2019. Online Platforms and Digital Advertising: Market
Study Interim Report. Report by UK Competition and Markets Authority. Accessed at http
s://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/5dfa0580ed915d093
3009761/Interim report.pdf on July 6 2021.
Crupi, Anthony. 2009. “Cable guy says ratings don’t ad up.” Hollywood Reporter, April 14.
Accessed at https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/business/businessnews/cable-guy-says-ratings-dont-82305/ on July 13 2021.
Dee, Jonathan. 2002. “The myth of ‘18 to 34’.” New York Times Magazine, October 13. Accessed
at https://www.nytimes.com/2002/10/13/magazine/the-myth-of-18to-34.html on July 5 2021.
DeLorme, Denise E., Jisu Huh, and Leonard N. Reid. 2006. “Age differences in how consumers
behave following exposure to DTC advertising.” Health Communication 20(3): 255-265.
Delrahim, Makan. 2019. “Opening remarks for the public workshop on competition in television
and digital advertising.” US Department of Justice Transcript. Accessed at https://web.
archive.org/web/20210727155932/https://www.justice.gov/atr/pa
ge/file/1202076/download on May 7 2023.
Dubé, Jean-Pierre, Günter J. Hitsch, and Puneet Manchanda. 2005. “An empirical model of advertising dynamics.” Quantitative Marketing and Economics 3: 107–144.
The Economist. 2021. “The Olympics is a ratings flop. Advertisers don’t care.” The Economist,
August 11. Accessed at https://www.economist.com/business/the-olym
pics-is-a-ratings-flop-advertisers-dont-care/21803502 on June 16
2022.
Einstein, Mara. 2004. “Broadcast network television, 1955-2003: The pursuit of advertising and
the decline of diversity.” Journal of Media Economics 17(2): 145-155.
Facebook. 2018. “Build TV and Facebook campaigns that work better together.” Accessed at
https://web.archive.org/web/20180525071501/https://www.face
book.com/business/news/build-tv-and-facebook-campaigns-thatwork-better-together on February 23 2023.
Facebook. 2022. “Documentation of marketing API.” Accessed at https://developers.f
acebook.com/docs/marketing-api/reference/ad-campaign-group/#R
eading on July 11 2022.
Fan, Ying. 2013. “Ownership consolidation and product characteristics: A study of the US daily
newspaper market.” American Economic Review 103(5): 1598-1628.
Fudenberg, Drew, Jon Kleinberg, Annie Liang, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2022. “Measuring the
completeness of economic models.” Journal of Political Economy 130(4): 956-990.
44

Fudenberg, Drew, Wayne Gao and Annie Liang. 2023. “How flexible is that functional form?
Quantifying the restrictiveness of theories.” MIT Working Paper. Accessed at http://dx
.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3580408 on March 7 2023.
Gabler, Neal. 2014. “The tyranny of 18 to 49: American culture held hostage.” The Norman Lear
Center. Accessed at https://web.archive.org/web/20221006143942/htt
ps://learcenter.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/10/Gabler18to49.p
df on April 17 2023.
Garland, Eric. 2002. “Disney marshals its parts into a new kind of advertising deal.” New York
Times, June 21. Accessed at https://web.archive.org/web/20150527211647
/https://www.nytimes.com/2002/06/21/business/media-businessadvertising-disney-marshals-its-parts-into-new-kind-advertis
ing.html on April 29 2023.
Gentzkow, Matthew, Jesse M. Shapiro, and Michael Sinkinson. 2014. “Competition and ideological diversity: Historical evidence from US newspapers.” American Economics Review
104(10): 3073-3114.
Geskey, Ronald D. 2016. Media Planning and Buying in the 21st Century, 4th ed. CreateSpace
Independent Publishing Platform.
GfK Mediamark Research and Intelligence. 2017. “Survey of the American Consumer, RespondentLevel Data for 2015.” GfK Mediamark Research and Intelligence. https://www.mrisim
mons.com/our-data/national-studies/survey-american-consumer/.
(accessed August 2017).
GfK Mediamark Research and Intelligence. 2019. “Survey of the American Consumer, RespondentLevel Data for 2017.” GfK Mediamark Research and Intelligence. https://www.mrisim
mons.com/our-data/national-studies/survey-american-consumer/.
(accessed March 2022).
GfK Mediamark Research and Intelligence. 2021. “Survey of the American Consumer, RespondentLevel Data for 2019.” GfK Mediamark Research and Intelligence. https://www.mrisim
mons.com/our-data/national-studies/survey-american-consumer/.
(accessed in May 2022).
Goettler, Ronald L. 2012. “Advertising rates, audience composition, and competition in the network television industry.” University of Chicago Working Paper. Accessed at http://go
ettler.simon.rochester.edu/research/papers/adrates.pdf on May 31
2022.
Greenwood, Jeremy, Yueyuan Ma, and Mehmet Yorukoglu. 2021. “‘You will:’ A macroeconomic
analysis of digital advertising.” NBER Working Paper No. 28537.
Hristakeva, Sylvia and Julie H. Mortimer. Forthcoming. “Price dispersion and legacy discounts in
45

the national television advertising market.” Marketing Science.
Jeziorski, Przemysław. 2014. “Effects of mergers in two-sided markets: The US radio industry.”
American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 6(4): 35-73.
Kaiser, Ulrich and Julian Wright. 2006. “Price structure in two-sided markets: Evidence from the
magazine industry.” International Journal of Industrial Organization 24(1): 1-28.
Krouse, Sarah. 2022. “Netflix’s ad-supported plan will launch in November at $6.99 a month.”
Wall Street Journal, October 13. Accessed at https://www.wsj.com/articles/n
etflix-ads-to-launch-in-november-11665680110 on May 15 2023.
Lambrecht, Anja and Catherine Tucker. 2019. “Algorithmic bias? An empirical study of apparent
gender-based discrimination in the display of STEM career ads.” Management Science 65(7):
2647-3448.
Lee, Robin, Michael Whinston, and Ali Yurukoglu. 2021. “Structural empirical analysis of contracting in vertical markets.” In Kate Ho, Ali Hortacsu, and Alessandro Lizzeri, eds., Handbook of Industrial Organization Volume 4, 1st ed. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Lewis, Randall A. and David H. Reiley. 2014. “Advertising effectively influences older users:
How field experiments can improve measurement and targeting.” Review of Industrial Organization 44(2): 147–159.
Liao, Lu, Alan Sorensen, and Andrey Zubanov. 2020. “Measuring the value of targeted television
advertising.” University of Wisconsin Working Paper. Preliminary draft accessed at https:
//www.ssc.wisc.edu/˜sorensen/papers/targeted advertising jun20
20.pdf on May 31 2022 and cited with author permission.
McGranaghan, Matthew, Jura Liaukonyte, and Kenneth C. Wilbur. 2022. “How viewer tuning,
presence, and attention respond to ad content and predict brand search lift.” Marketing Science 41(5): 871-1027.
MoffettNathanson. 2017. “U. S. internet: From cat videos to the NFL - are we at the tipping
point for online video?” MoffettNathanson (An SVB Company). Accessed at https:
//web.archive.org/web/20230301231204/https://www.moffettnatha
nson.com/research.aspx?Section=Media+%2FTelecom on March 1, 2023.
MoffettNathanson. 2022. “Netflix and Disney: Mad Men to the rescue?” MoffettNathanson (An
SVB Company). Accessed at https://web.archive.org/web/20230301231204
/https://www.moffettnathanson.com/research.aspx?Section=Media
+%2FTelecom on March 1, 2023.
Newman, Andrew Adam. 2012. “In AARP’s view, advertisers need to focus.” New York Times,
July 19. Accessed at https://www.nytimes.com/2012/07/19/business/me
dia/aarp-campaign-tries-to-persuade-advertisers.html on June 18,
2022.
46

The News Journal. 2015. Sunday News Journal Sep. 13 - 19, 2015. Wilmington, Delaware.
Accessed at https://www.newspapers.com/image/127413547/ on May 19
2022.
The Nielsen Company. 2017. Ad Intel Methodology by Medium. Report by the Nielsen Company.
Accessed at http://en-us.nielsen.com/sitelets/cls/documents/AdIn
tel/AdIntel-Methodology-by-Medium-Info-Kit.pdf on February 24 2021.
The Nielsen Company. 2018. CMO Report. Report by The Nielsen Company. Accessed at
https://www.nielsen.com/wp-content/uploads/sites/3/2019/04/ni
elsen-cmo-report-2018-2.pdf on January 7 2022.
The Nielsen Company. 2019. “Ad Intel dataset.” The Nielsen Company [publisher], Kilts Center
for Marketing, University of Chicago Booth School of Business [distributor]. https://ww
w.chicagobooth.edu/research/kilts/datasets/nielsenIQ-nielsen.
(accessed March 2019).
The Nielsen Company. 2021. Nielsen Local TV View. Custom report by the Nielsen Company.
Accessed at
https://www.nielsen.com/us/en/client-learning/tv/local/nltv/ in
February 2021.
The Nielsen Company. 2022. “Ad Intel dataset.” The Nielsen Company [publisher], Kilts Center
for Marketing, University of Chicago Booth School of Business [distributor]. https://ww
w.chicagobooth.edu/research/kilts/datasets/nielsenIQ-nielsen.
(accessed March 2022).
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development. 2022. “Consumer Price Index: Total
All Items for the United States [CPALTT01USA661S].” FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St.
Louis [publisher]. https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/CPALTT01USA66
1S. (accessed June 2022).
Papazian, Ed, editor. 2009. TV Dimensions 2009. New York, NY: Media Dynamics, Inc.
Patel, Sahil. 2015. “Turner’s new ad sales strategy sharpens its focus on clients, data.” Digiday
December 10. Accessed at https://web.archive.org/web/202302081757
13/https://digiday.com/media/turners-new-ad-sales-strategysharpens-focus-clients-data/ on April 29 2023.
Phillips, Robert and Graham Young. 2012. “Television advertisement pricing in the United States.”
In Özalp Özer and Robert Phillips, eds., Oxford Handbook of Pricing Management. Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press.
Pomerantz, Earl. 2006. “Why do advertisers still covet the 18-49s?” Television Quarterly 36:
40-44. Accessed at https://web.archive.org/web/20200713102219/http:
//www.tvquarterly.net/tvq 36 3/media/articles/36.3Why do Adver
47

tisers.pdf on June 3 2021.
Prat, Andrea. 2018. “Media power.” Journal of Political Economy 126(4): 1747-1783.
Prat, Andrea and Tommaso Valletti. 2022. “Attention oligopoly.” American Economic Journal:
Microeconomics 14(3): 530-557.
Rochet, Jean-Charles and Jean Tirole. 2003. “Platform competition in two-sided markets.” Journal
of the European Economic Association 1(4): 990–102.
Shi, C. Matthew. 2016. “Catching (exclusive) eyeballs: Multi-homing and platform competition
in the magazine industry.” University of Virginia Working Paper. Accessed at https:
//web.archive.org/web/20230903201736/https://mattshi.weebly
.com/uploads/2/4/8/4/24842967/shi cmatt jmp jan16.pdf in September
2023.
Smith, Ruth B., George P. Moschis, and Roy L. Moore. 1985. “Some advertising influences on the
elderly consumer: Implications for theoretical consideration.” Current Issues and Research
in Advertising 8(1): 187-201.
Spence, Michael and Bruce Owen. 1977. “Television programming, monopolistic competition,
and welfare.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 91(1): 103-26.
Statista. 2021. Media Owners Advertising Revenue in the United States in 2021, by Medium.
Research report by Statista. Accessed at https://www.statista.com/statistic
s/492908/media-owners-revenue-sector-usa/ on August 16 2021.
Strikesocial. 2017. YouTube Advertising: 2017 Benchmark Report. Report by Strikesocial.
Accessed at https://web.archive.org/web/20211019131344/https:
//strikesocial.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/2017 YouTube Dat
a Report .pdf on March 2 2023.
Surowiecki, James. 2002. “Ageism in advertising.” The New Yorker, March 24. Accessed at
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2002/04/01/ageism-in-adve
rtising on July 6 2021.
S&P Global Market Intelligence. 2019. SNL Kagan Report for 2015. Report by S&P Global
Market Intelligence. Accessed at https://www.spglobal.com/marketintelli
gence/en/ in November 2019.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2021. “2020 Census apportionment results delivered to the president.” U.S.
Census Bureau Release Number CB21-CN.30. Accessed at https://www.census.g
ov/newsroom/press-releases/2021/2020-census-apportionmentresults.html on July 5 2022.
Veiga, André and E. Glen Weyl. 2016. “Product design in selection markets.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 131(2): 1007–1056.
WARC. 2001. “P&G and Viacom ink $300m cross-media deal.” WARC May 31. Accessed at ht
48

tps://web.archive.org/web/20230428230056/https://www.warc.com
/newsandopinion/news/pg and viacom ink 300m crossmedia deal/8911
on April 29 2023.
Weprin, Alex. 2015. “Upfronts 2015: NBCU’s cable lifestyle channels make their pitch.” Politico
March 31. Accessed at https://web.archive.org/web/20230420230317/h
ttps://www.politico.com/media/story/2015/03/upfronts-2015nbcus-cable-lifestyle-channels-make-their-pitch-003625/ on April
20 2023.
Wikipedia. 2022. “2014–15 United States network television schedule”. Wikimedia Foundation.
Accessed at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2014%E2%80%9315 United S
tates network television schedule on May 19 2022.
Wilbur, Kenneth C. 2008. “A two-sided, empirical model of television advertising and viewing
markets.” Marketing Science 27(3): 356-378.
Zubanov, Andrey. 2020. “The TV advertising market: Demographic segmentation and the impact
of viewership decline.” University of Wisconsin-Madison Working Paper. Accessed at http
s://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract id=3853300 on August
14 2021.

49

A

Proofs and Additional Theoretical Results

A.1

Preliminaries

Lemma 1. (i) For any V (·), not necessarily monotone or submodular, in any equilibrium and
for any owner Z ∈ Z, the payments p∗nZ , p∗n0 Z made in equilibrium to owner Z by any two
advertisers n, n0 must coincide, p∗nZ = p∗n0 Z .
(ii) If V (·) is either monotone and submodular or strictly monotone and not necessarily submodular, then in any equilibrium each advertiser buys slots on all outlets.
Proof. Fix any equilibrium. First, we claim that because the advertisers are homogeneous, they
must have the same equilibrium payoff. Suppose toward contradiction that advertiser n0 has a
strictly higher equilibrium payoff than advertiser n. Now, let advertiser n imitate the strategy of
advertiser n0 . Since ad slots are not scarce (N ≤ K), advertiser n must obtain the equilibrium
payoff of advertiser n0 , which is a contradiction. So all advertisers have the same equilibrium
payoff, which we denote by W .
For part (i), suppose toward contradiction that in the equilibrium there exists some owner
Z ∈ Z such that not all advertisers make the same total payment to Z. Let n be an advertiser whose
equilibrium payment to owner Z is at least as much as any other advertiser’s (and therefore strictly
greater than some other advertiser’s). Let S ⊆ Z be the set of outlets owned by owner Z on which
advertiser n buys slots. Let owner Z deviate by offering bundle B = S at price p∗S − ε for any ε > 0,
where p∗S denotes the minimum price to buy slots on the set of outlets S at the on-path history in the
supposed equilibrium. By subgame perfection, at every possible subgame, each advertiser must
purchase a payoff-maximizing set of bundles. We claim that upon the deviation by owner Z, all
advertisers buy bundle B offered by owner Z. To see why, note that by buying the bundle B upon
the deviation (and imitating advertiser n’s choices at the on-path history), any advertiser can obtain
a payoff of W + ε, which is strictly greater than the payoff of W prescribed by the equilibrium, and
therefore (because no prices have changed other than the price of bundle B) also strictly greater
than the payoff from any other choice of bundles. For sufficiently small ε, the deviation increases
the payment to owner Z from at least one advertiser other than n more than it decreases the payment
from advertiser n, and therefore strictly increases the payoff to owner Z. This establishes that the
deviation is profitable, and hence that there is a contradiction.
For part (ii), suppose toward contradiction that in the equilibrium there exists some advertiser
n who does not buy a slot on some outlet j ∈ Z owned by some owner Z ∈ Z. Let T ⊂ Z be the
set of outlets owned by owner Z on which advertiser n buys slots, and let R ⊆ J \Z be the set of
outlets owned by other owners on which advertiser n buys slots. By part (i), all advertisers pay
the same total amount to owner Z, which then must be p∗T , the minimum price to buy slots on all
50

outlets in T . The equilibrium payoff for each advertiser is then given by
W = V (T ∪ R) − p∗R − p∗T ,
where p∗R is the minimum price to buy slots on all outlets in R. Let owner Z deviate by offering
a single bundle Z with a price p∗T + ε for some ε > 0. We show that for ε small enough, every
advertiser must purchase this bundle. First, note that V (Z ∪ R) −V (T ∪ R) > 0. This is clearly true
if V (·) is strictly monotone. If V (·) is submodular and monotone, then we also have
V (Z ∪ R) −V (T ∪ R) ≥ V (J ) −V (J \ (Z\T )) ≥ V (J ) −V (J \ { j}) = v j > 0
where the strict inequality is due to our assumption that every outlet has positive incremental value.
Thus, for ε small enough, we have
V (Z ∪ R) − p∗R − (p∗T + ε) > V (T ∪ R) − p∗R − p∗T = W.
Now, pick any such sufficiently small ε. Note again that by subgame perfection, at every possible
subgame, each advertiser must purchase a payoff-maximizing set of bundles. Thus, upon this
deviation, each advertiser buys the bundle Z at the price p∗T + ε, because any strategy not doing so
is a feasible strategy at the on-path history in the supposed equilibrium and therefore generates a
payoff less than or equal to W . But this is then a profitable deviation for owner Z, and therefore a
contradiction.
A.2

Proofs Omitted From the Main Text

Proof of Theorem 1. We first construct an equilibrium. Let each owner Z offer, at a price of
pZ = vZ , a single bundle consisting of all outlets in Z. For any profile p of posted prices (including
those off of the equilibrium path), and any set of outlets S ⊆ J , let pS denote the minimum price
to buy slots on all the outlets in S. Now let every advertiser buy the same bundle S∗ (p), chosen
arbitrarily from the set of solutions to the problem
max |S|
s.t. S ∈ argmax V (S) − pS
S⊆J

By construction, S∗ (·) constitutes an equilibrium strategy profile for the advertisers.
It remains to verify that no owner has a profitable deviation from the proposed profile p∗ .
Observe that if owner Z plays the proposed strategy, then each advertiser buys the bundle offered by
owner Z regardless of the other owners’ offerings. This is because for any S ⊆ J \Z, submodularity
51

of V (·) implies
V (S ∪ Z) −V (S) ≥ V (J ) −V (J \Z) = vZ .
Fix any owner Z. Suppose all other owners Z 0 6= Z follow the proposed strategy. Fix any
advertiser. By the above observation we know that the advertiser buys slots on all outlets not in Z
regardless of the strategy of owner Z. It follows that the most that owner Z can extract from the
advertiser is vZ because for any T ⊇ J \Z, monotonicity of V (·) implies
vZ = V (J ) −V (J \Z) ≥ V (T ) −V (J \Z)
where the right hand side is the most that the advertiser is willing to pay for slots on all the outlets
in T \ (J \Z). Therefore, there is no profitable deviation from the proposed strategy for owner Z.
Since Z is an arbitrary owner, the proposed profile is an equilibrium.
To prove the second part of the statement, fix any equilibrium of the game, and denote its
price profile by p∗ . By Lemma 1(ii), all advertisers buy slots on all outlets in J . Therefore, each
advertiser pays p∗Z to each owner Z. If p∗Z > vZ for any owner Z, then any advertiser can profitably
deviate by only buying slots on all outlets in J \Z. If p∗Z < vZ for any owner Z, then, by the
submodularity of V (·), owner Z can profitably deviate by offering a single bundle Z with a price
vZ − ε for ε > 0 sufficiently small to extract vZ − ε > p∗Z from each advertiser. Thus p∗Z = vZ for
all Z ∈ Z.
Monotonicity and Submodularity of V (·) in the Viewer-level Model. Let JF be the set of
outlets whose owner is of format F. For each viewer i ∈ I and each set of outlets S ⊆ J , let XSi
count the number of outlets in S on which viewer i sees ads. For each S ⊆ J we can write
i
h 
i
i
V (S) = |I| · E ai u XS∩J1 , . . . , XS∩J|F | = |I| · E [Vi (S)]
where the expectation is taken with respect to the population of viewers i and their random viewing
behavior, and the value Vi (·) is based on the realized behavior of viewer i. To show that V (·) is
monotone and submodular, it suffices to show that Vi (S) is monotone and submodular for all i and
realized X·i , since averaging preserves monotonicity and submodularity.
To show monotonicity of Vi (·), pick some i and realized X·i and fix any S ⊆ J and j ∈ J \S.
Let F be the format of the owner of outlet j. Then,
 



i
i
i
i
i
i
Vi (S ∪ { j})−Vi (S) = ai 1i→ j u XS∩J
,
.
.
.
,
X
+
1,
.
.
.
,
X
−
u
X
,
.
.
.
,
X
,
.
.
.
,
X
S∩JF
S∩J|F |
S∩J1
S∩JF
S∩J|F |
1
where i → j denotes the event that viewer i sees ads on outlet j. This shows the monotonicity of
Vi (·) as u (·) is monotone.
52

To show the submodularity of Vi (·), pick some i and realized X·i and fix any S ⊆ T ⊆ J , and
i
j ∈ J \T . Let F be the format of the owner of outlet j. Since XS∩J
≤ XTi ∩J 0 for all formats F 0 ,
F0
F
we have
 



i
i
i
i
i
i
Vi (S ∪ { j}) −Vi (S) = ai 1i→ j u XS∩J1 , . . . , XS∩JF + 1, . . . , XS∩J|F | − u XS∩J1 , . . . , XS∩JF , . . . , XS∩J|F |
 



i
i
i
i
i
i
≥ ai 1i→ j u XS∩J
,
.
.
.
,
X
+
1,
.
.
.
,
X
−
u
X
,
.
.
.
,
X
,
.
.
.
,
X
T ∩JF
S∩J|F |
S∩J1
T ∩JF
S∩J|F |
1



 
≥ ai 1i→ j u XTi ∩J1 , . . . , XTi ∩JF + 1, . . . , XTi ∩J|F | − u XTi ∩J1 , . . . , XTi ∩JF , . . . , XTi ∩J|F |
= Vi (T ∪ { j})) −Vi (T )
where the second line follows because u (·) has decreasing differences in each argument, and the
third line follows because u (·) is submodular. This shows the submodularity of Vi (·).
Proof of Corollary 1.
that

Following the notation in the proof for the viewer-level model, we have


i
h 

i
i
vZ = |I| · E ai u XJ − u XJ \Z


= |I| · E ai 1i→Z 1i6→J \Z


= ∑ ai E [1i→Z ] E 1i6→J \Z
i

= ∑ ai ηiZ ∏ 1 − ηi j
i



j6∈Z

= ∑ ai ηiZ ∏ (1 − ηiZ 0 )
i

Z 0 6=Z

where we use the notation 1i→S to denote the event that viewer i watches at least one outlet in the
set S and the notation 1i6→S to denote the opposite. The second line follows because u(M) = 1M>0 ,
the third because of the independence of ad viewing across outlets, and the fourth and fifth by the
definition of ηiZ and the structure of viewing behavior in the viewer-level model. The corollary
then follows by Theorem 1.
Proof of Proposition 1. The setting of Proposition 1 is formally equivalent to a special case of the
setting of Proposition 4 in Appendix A.3.1, in which β1 = u (1) − u (0) = 1 > 0 = u (2) − u (1) = β2
and, for each owner Z, we consider that it owns a single outlet with viewing probability ηg j = ηgZ .
The desired result then follows by Proposition 4.

53

Proof of Proposition 2. The setting of Proposition 2 is formally equivalent to a special case of the
setting of Proposition 5 in Appendix A.3.1, in which β1 = u (1) − u (0) = 1 > 0 = u (2) − u (1) = β2
and, for each owner Z, we consider that it owns a single outlet with viewing probability ηg j = ηgZ .
The desired result then follows by Proposition 5.
Proof of Proposition 3. We proceed by showing that the setting of Proposition 3 is equivalent to
a special case of the setting of Theorem 1. Let J˜ be the set of outlets owned by owners in Z̃. Let


J ∗ = J \ J˜ ∪ J˜ × I
be an augmented set of outlets that includes viewer-specific instances of all outlets in J˜ . Let



Z ∗ = Z\Z̃ ∪ Z̃ × I be the corresponding augmented set of owners. Let Ji∗ = J \ J˜ ∪

J˜ × {i} ⊆ J ∗ denote the set of outlets on which it is possible to show ads to viewer i. Let Vi∗ (·)
be the restriction of Vi (·) to Ji∗ , i.e.
Vi∗ (S) = Vi (S ∩ Ji∗ )
for all S ⊆ J ∗ , where with slight abuse of notation we take {( j, i)} as equivalent to { j} when
evaluating Vi (·). Let V ∗ (·) = ∑i∈I Vi∗ (·). Recall that both monotonicity and submodularity are
preserved under restriction and addition. Observe that an instance of the game considered in Theorem 1 with primitives J ∗ ,V ∗ (·) , Z ∗ is equivalent to the game considered in Proposition 3. The
conclusions of Proposition 3 therefore follow from Theorem 1 and the structure of the value function Vi∗ (·).
Proof of Corollary 2. Following the notation in the proof of Corollary 1, for any owner Z in
format 1 we have that

i
h 

vZ = |I| · E ai u XJi 1 , XJi 2 − u XJi 1 \Z , XJi 2
 


= |I| · E ai 1X i >0 − 1X i >0 − φ 1X i X i >0 − 1X i X i >0
J1
J1 J2
J1 \Z
J1 \Z J2
 


= |I| · E ai 1X i >0 − 1X i >0 − φ 1X i >0 1X i >0 − 1X i >0
J1
J2
J1
J1 \Z
J1 \Z


 
= |I| · E ai 1X i >0 − 1X i >0
1 − φ 1X i >0
J1

J2

J1 \Z



= ∑ ai E [1i→Z ] E 1i6→J1 \Z (1 − φ E [1i→J2 ])
i

54

!!
= ∑ ai ηiZ 1 − φ

1−

(1 − ηiZ 0 )

∏

Z 0 ∈Z\F(Z)

i

∏

(1 − ηiZ 0 )

∏

(1 − ηiZ 0 ) .

Z 0 ∈F(Z)\{Z}

and

!!
viZ = ai ηiZ 1 − φ

1−

∏

(1 − ηiZ 0 )

Z 0 ∈Z\F(Z)

Z 0 ∈F(Z)\{Z}

The second line follows because u (M1 , M2 ) = 1M1 >0 + 1M2 >0 − φ 1M1 M2 >0 and the remaining lines
follow from the independence of ad viewing across outlets, the structure of viewing behavior, and
the definition of ηiZ . An analogous construction applies for any owner Z in format 2. The corollary
then follows by Proposition 3.
Proof of Corollary 3. This is an immediate consequence of Corollary 2.
A.3

Extensions

A.3.1

Comparative Statics with General Diminishing Returns

Consider a special case of the viewer-level model in which there is a single format, every owner
owns a single outlet, ai = a > 0 for all i ∈ I, and ηi j = ηi0 j for any i, i0 ∈ g for g ∈ G and G a
partition of I. To ease notation, let β0 = 0, and let
βm := u (m) − u (m − 1)
for m ≥ 1, so that
M

u(M) = ∑ βm .
m=0

Let µg denote the size of viewers from group g. Let
λ j = ∑ µg ηg j , σg j =
g∈G

µg ηg j
λj

denote, respectively, the expected number of viewers seeing an ad on outlet j, and the share of this
audience that comes from group g. Then p∗j /λ j is the equilibrium price per viewer charged by the
owner for an ad slot. In this setting, we define a group g ∈ G to be less active than group h ∈ G if
ηg j ≤ ηh j for all j ∈ J .
Proposition 4. Suppose that outlet j ∈ J draws a larger share of its audience from a less active
group g and a smaller share of its audience from a more active group h than outlet k ∈ J , in
the sense that σg j ≥ σgk and σh j ≤ σhk , and that the two outlets have equal total audience sizes,
55

λ j = λk , and equal shares of audience from groups other than g and h, σg0 j = σg0 k for all g0 6= g, h.
Then outlet j has a higher equilibrium price per viewer than outlet k, p∗j /λ j ≥ p∗k /λk , with strict

inequality whenever ∏l6= j,k 1 − ηgl > ∏l6= j,k (1 − ηhl ), σg j > σgk , and β1 > β2 .
Proof. With a slight abuse of notation, for any group g, let g denote both the group and a randomly
sampled viewer from the group. By Theorem 1, we can write
p∗j = a ∑ µg E[1g→ j βX g

J \{ j}

g

+1 ]

where g → j denotes the event that a randomly sampled viewer g views ads on outlet j and XJg \{ j}
counts the random number of outlets other than j on which viewer g views ads. For any g0 6= g, h,
we have
λ j σg0 j λk σg0 k
ηg0 j =
=
= ηg0 k .
µg0
µg0
Therefore, for any g0 6= g, h, by independence and symmetry,
E[1g0 → j β g0

XJ \{ j} +1

] = E[1g0 →k β g0

XJ \{k} +1

].

To prove that p∗j /λ j ≥ p∗k /λk , it then suffices to show
µg E[1g→ j βX g

J \{ j}

+1 − 1g→k βXJ \{k} +1 ] ≥ µh E[1h→k βXJh \{k} +1 − 1h→ j βXJh \{ j} +1 ].
g

Because ad viewing is independent across outlets for any given viewer, we can write the above as


µg ηg j (1 − ηgk ) − ηgk (1 − ηg j ) E[βX g

+1 ] ≥ µh
J \{ j,k}



ηhk (1 − ηh j ) − ηh j (1 − ηhk ) E[βX h

J \{ j,k}

+1 ]

where XJg \{ j,k} counts the random number of outlets not in { j, k} on which viewer g views ads.
Since λ j = λk , this reduces to
(σg j − σgk )E[βX g

J \{ j,k}

+1 ] ≥ (σhk − σh j )E[βXJh \{ j,k} +1 ].

It follows easily from our assumptions that σg j − σgk = σhk − σh j ≥ 0. So it suffices to show
E[βX g
+1 ] ≥ E[βXJh \{ j,k} +1 ]. Since ηg j ≤ ηh j for all j ∈ J and viewing decisions are independent
J \{ j,k}
across outlets for both g and h, there exists a monotone coupling of the viewing decisions by g and
h in the sense that 1g→ j ≤ 1h→ j for all j ∈ J . Under this coupling, we have XJg \{ j,k} ≤ XJh \{ j,k}
pointwise. The claim then follows directly by noting that βm is non-increasing in m for m ≥ 1 and
by the definition of the viewer-level model.

To show strict inequality, suppose that ∏l6= j,k 1 − ηgl > ∏l6= j,k (1 − ηhl ), σg j > σgk , and
56

β1 > β2 . Using integration by parts and the definition of βm , we have
g
XJ \{ j,k} +1

E[β

Z ∞

] − E[βX h

J \{ j,k}

Z ∞

> s)ds −
P(βX h
+1 > s)ds
J \{ j,k}
0


= ∑ (βm − βm+1 ) P(XJg \{ j,k} + 1 ≤ m) − P(XJh \{ j,k} + 1 ≤ m) > 0

+1 ] =

P(β

0
∞

g
XJ \{ j,k} +1

m=1

where the strict inequality follows from the fact that each term in the summation is nonnegative,
β1 > β2 , and P(XJg \{ j,k} = 0) = ∏l6= j,k (1 − ηgl ) > ∏l6= j,k (1 − ηhl ) = P(XJh \{ j,k} = 0). Since σg j >
∗
∗
σgk , we then have (σg j − σgk )E[βX g
+1 ] > (σhk − σh j )E[βX h
+1 ] and hence p j /λ j > pk /λk .
J \{ j,k}

J \{ j,k}

Proposition 5. Suppose that outlet j has a larger audience than outlet k in the sense that for
some δ ≥ 1, ηg j = δ ηgk for all g ∈ G. Then outlet j has a higher price per viewer than outlet k,

p∗j /λ j ≥ p∗k /λk with strict inequalty whenever ηg j ∏l6= j,k 1 − ηgl > 0, δ > 1, and β1 > β2 .
Proof. We follow the same notation as in the proof of Proposition 4. By Theorem 1, we can write
h
p∗j = a ∑ µg E 1g→ j βX g

i

J \{ j}

g

+1


h
= a ∑ µg ηg j ηgk E βX g

i

J \{ j,k}

g

 h
g
+2 + ηg j 1 − ηgk E βX

i

J \{ j,k}

+1

 h

i
1
g
+2 + δ ηgk 1 − ηg j E βXJ \{ j,k} +1
J \{ j,k}
δ
g

h
i
i
h
 h
g
g
g
= a ∑ µg ηgk ηg j E βX
+2 + ηgk 1 − ηg j E βX
+1 + ηgk (δ − 1) E βX

h
= a ∑ µg ηgk ηg j E βX g

i

J \{ j,k}

g

 h
= a ∑ µg ηgk E βX g

i

J \{k}

g

 h
≥ a ∑ µg ηgk E βX g

h
g
+1 + (δ − 1) E βX

J \{ j,k}

i

J \{k}

g

J \{ j,k}

+1

+ (δ − 1)E[β

J \{ j,k}

i
+1

i
+1

g
XJ \{k} +1


λj
] = δ p∗k = p∗k
λk

where we have used independence of ad viewing across outlets, ηg j = δ ηgk , δ ≥ 1, XJg \{k} ≥
XJg \{ j,k} , and the fact that βm is nonincreasing in m for m ≥ 1.

To show strict inequality, suppose that ηg j ∏l6= j,k 1 − ηgl > 0, δ > 1, and β1 > β2 . For any
group g, using integration by parts and the definition of βm , we have

h
E βX g

J \{ j,k}

i
+1

− E[βX g

J \{k}

Z ∞
+1 ] =

0
∞

P(βX g

J \{ j,k}

+1 > s)ds −

Z ∞
0

P(βX g

J \{k}

+1 > s)ds



g
g
= ∑ (βm − βm+1 ) P(XJ \{ j,k} + 1 ≤ m) − P(XJ \{k} + 1 ≤ m) > 0
m=1

57

where the strict inequality
is nonnegative, β1 > β2 ,

follows fromthat each term in the summation

g
g
and P XJ \{ j,k} = 0 − P XJ \{k} = 0 = ηg j ∏l6= j,k 1 − ηgl > 0. Since δ > 1, we then have
h
i
∗
∗
g
g
(δ − 1) E βX
+1 ] and hence p j /λ j > pk /λk .
+1 > (δ − 1)E[βX
J \{ j,k}

A.3.2

J \{k}

Endogenous Response of Viewers

There is a set of programs K. Each outlet consists of K programs. Each program has one ad
slot. Each advertiser that purchases an ad slot on a given outlet is randomly assigned to the slot
in one of the outlet’s programs. There is a set of viewers I. Each viewer views a subset of
programs. Whether a given viewer views a given program depends on whether that program carries
an ad, but not on whether other programs do. Thus, as in Ambrus, Calvano, and Reisinger (2016,
Section II), advertising may be a nuisance (or attraction) that affects a given outlet’s audience, but
advertising on one outlet does not drive audience to (or attract audience from) another. For each
viewer that views its ad on M ∈ N distinct outlets, each advertiser gets value u (M) ≥ 0 where u (·)
is nondecreasing and exhibits decreasing differences.
Proposition 6. There exists an equilibrium. In any equilibrium, all advertisers buy slots on all
outlets, and the payment by each advertiser to each owner Z is given by p∗Z = vZ .
Proof. By Theorem 1, it suffices to show that the value function V (·), in this setting, satisfies
monotonicity and submodularity. Let k ∈ K denote a generic program and let K j ⊆ K be the
programs associated with outlet j. For each viewer i ∈ I, let i 99K k denote the event that viewer
i watches program k in the scenario that program k carries an ad. This event may be random if
viewing behavior is probabilistic. For a set of programs K0 ⊆ K, let
XKi 0 = ∑ 1i99Kk
k∈K0

be the (possibly random) number of programs in K0 watched by i in the scenario that each program
k ∈ K0 carries an ad. Let

R = K0 ⊆ K : |K0 ∩ K j | = 1 for all j ∈ J
be the set of all sets of representative programs, such that within each set there is one program for
each outlet. For any set of outlets S ⊆ J , let KS = ∪ j∈S K j . For each advertiser, the value of a set
of outlets S ⊆ J can be written as
#
"


1
i
V (S) = |I| · E
u XK0 ∩KS
|R| K∑
0 ∈R
58

where the expectation is taken with respect to the population of viewers and the (possibly random)
viewing behavior of each viewer. Because averaging preserves monotonicity and submodularity,
it suffices to show that for any realized viewing behavior and representative programs R, and any
K0 ∈ R, we have that the function


Ṽi (S) := u XKi 0 ∩KS
is monotone and submodular. It is clear that Ṽi (S) is monotone since u (·) is nondecreasing. For
submodularity, note that for any S ⊆ T ⊆ J and any j ∈ J \T ,




Ṽi (S ∪ { j}) − Ṽi (S) = u XKi 0 ∩KS∪{ j} − u XKi 0 ∩KS



≥ u XKi 0 ∩KT ∪{ j} − u XKi 0 ∩KT
= Ṽi (T ∪ { j}) − Ṽi (T )
where the second line follows from the assumption that u (·) has decreasing differences.
A.3.3

Rationing of Ad Slots

Suppose that we may have N > K and assume that bundle prices can only take on values in the
set {0, ∆, 2∆, · · · } where ∆ > 0 is some fixed increment. For this extension, we allow for mixed
strategies and assume that the advertisers make purchasing decisions sequentially (in a random
order) rather than simultaneously.
Proposition 7. There exists a subgame perfect Nash equilibrium, possibly in mixed strategies, and
in any subgame perfect Nash equilibrium each owner Z earns an expected revenue per ad slot
between (vZ − ∆) / |Z| and ∑ j∈Z V ({ j}) / |Z|.
Proof. We prove the second part of the statement first. Fix any subgame perfect equilibrium allowing for mixed strategies (SPEMS). Suppose, toward contradiction, that expected revenue per
slot is strictly higher than ∑ j∈Z V ({ j}) / |Z| for some owner Z ∈ Z. Then the owner’s expected
total revenue is strictly higher than K ∑ j∈Z V ({ j}). Thus with positive probability, the owner earns
a realized revenue strictly higher than K ∑ j∈Z V ({ j}). In any such event, there is at least one advertiser who buys slots on a set of outlets B ⊆ Z and pays strictly more than ∑ j∈B V ({ j}) to the
owner. Let S ⊆ J be the set of outlets that this advertiser buys slots on. Since any non-negative
submodular function is also sub-additive, we have that
V (S) −V (S\B) ≤ V (B) −V (∅) ≤ ∑ V ({ j}) .
j∈B

59

So not buying anything from Z is a profitable deviation for the advertiser, implying a contradiction.
Next, toward contradiction suppose that the expected revenue per slot is strictly lower than
(vZ − ∆) / |Z| for some owner Z ∈ Z. Then the expected total revenue is strictly lower than
K (vZ − ∆). Let the owner deviate by offering a single bundle Z with a price p̃Z = dvZ − ∆e, where
dxe denotes the operator that rounds x up to the closest value in {0, ∆, 2∆, · · · }. Note that
vZ − ∆ ≤ dvZ − ∆e < vZ .
Since p̃Z < vZ , by an argument analogous to the one in the proof of Theorem 1, submodularity
of V (·) implies that, in any realization, the owner would be able to sell all the slots and secure
revenue K p̃Z . Because this is a profitable deviation for the owner, we have a contradiction.
To show the existence of a SPEMS, we construct an auxiliary finite game in normal form,
apply the standard existence result, and then recover a SPEMS in the original game. Consider a
simultaneous-move game between all the owners. Let
A(Z) = {0, ∆, 2∆, · · · , dV (J )e, ∞}|P(Z)|
be the set of pure strategies that an owner can choose from. Clearly, A (Z) is finite for any Z.
For each pure strategy profile p ∈ A (Z), draw a random order for the advertisers and then let the
advertisers, in that order, choose which slots to buy given the posted prices specified in p. Then, for
each p ∈ A (Z), assign the resulting expected revenue (averaged over different orders) for owner Z
as the payoff to owner Z in the auxiliary game. This constructs a finite normal-form game among
the owners. Standard results then imply the existence of a Nash equilibrium, possibly in mixed
strategies. Call this equilibrium E. Now let each owner play the strategy prescribed by E in the
original game. Evidently, this constructs a SPEMS for the original game.
A.3.4

Partially Increasing Returns

Theorem 1 relies on submodularity of V (·). Under strict monotonicity the conclusion of Theorem
1 obtains under a weakening of submodularity.
Proposition 8. Suppose that V (·) is strictly monotone and that V (S ∪ Z)−V (S) ≥ V (J )−V (J \Z)
for all Z ∈ Z and S ⊆ J \Z. Then there exists an equilibrium, and in any equilibrium, all advertisers buy slots on all outlets, and the payment by each advertiser to each owner Z is given by
p∗Z = vZ .
Proof. We first construct an equilibrium. We use the same construction as in the proof of Theorem
1. When verifying the construction, the only properties of V (·) used in the proof of Theorem 1 are

60

that V (·) is monotone and that for any S ⊆ J \Z,
V (S ∪ Z) −V (S) ≥ V (J ) −V (J \Z)
which we assume.
To prove the second part of the statement, fix any equilibrium of the game. By Lemma 1(ii)
and strict monotonocity of V (·), all advertisers buy slots on all outlets in J . The rest follows
analogously to the proof of Theorem 1.
The decreasing differences condition on V (·) in the hypothesis of Proposition 8 is strictly weaker
than submodularity. In particular, consider the following example.
Example 1. Owners are singletons, each of a set I of viewers i ∈ I sees ads on at least L outlets,
each outlet has a strictly positive number of viewers, and an advertiser’s value for viewer i seeing
its ad M times is ai u (M) = ai ∑M
m=0 βm where ai > 0 for all i, β0 = 0, βm > 0 for all m, βm is
non-increasing for all m ≥ L, and βL ≤ min1≤m<L βm .
Example 1 allows increasing returns to advertising for viewers receiving few impressions (as in,
e.g., Dubé, Hitsch, and Manchanda 2005). Although Example 1 need not satisfy the hypotheses of
Theorem 1, Example 1 does satisfy the hypotheses of Proposition 8.
Proposition 9. The value function V (·) in Example 1 satisfies the hypotheses of Proposition 8.
Proof. For any viewer i ∈ I and outlet j ∈ J , let i → j denote the event that viewer i watches
outlet j. For any viewer i ∈ I and set of outlets S ⊆ J , let XSi denote the number of outlets in set S
on which viewer i views ads.We have that


V (S) = |I| · E ai u XSi = |I| · E [Vi (S)]
where the expectation is taken with respect to the population of viewers and their (possibly random)
viewing behavior. To show strict monotonicity, observe that for any j ∈ J and any S ⊆ J \ { j},
Vi (S ∪ { j}) −Vi (S) = ai 1i→ j βXS +1
is weakly positive, and strictly so with positive probability. To show that
V (S ∪ Z) −V (S) ≥ V (J ) −V (J \Z)
for all Z ∈ Z, S ⊆ J \Z, because owners are singletons, it suffices to show that for any j and any

61

S ⊆ J \ { j}, we have
Vi (S ∪ { j}) −Vi (S) = ai 1i→ j βXS +1 ≥ ai 1i→ j βXJ \{ j} +1 = Vi (J ) −Vi (J \ { j}) .
To see the above, consider the event i → j. Then, XJ \{ j} +1 = XJ ≥ L. Note that XS +1 = XS∪{ j} ≤
XJ . If XS∪{ j} ≥ L, then βXS∪{ j} ≥ βXJ because βm is non-increasing for m ≥ L. If XS∪{ j} < L, then
we have
βXJ ≤ βL ≤ min βm ≤ βXS∪{ j} .
1≤m<L

So in either case, the claimed inequality holds.
The setting of Example 1 continues to satisfy the hypotheses of Proposition 8 if a small number of
viewers view fewer than L outlets.
Example 2. Owners are singletons. There is a set of viewers I. There is a subset of viewers I ⊆ I
such that (i) each viewer i ∈ I sees ads on at least L outlets and (ii) each viewer i ∈ I sees ads on
both of any pair of outlets { j, k} ∈ J 2 with strictly positive probability. An advertiser’s value for
viewer i seeing its ad M times is ai u (M) = ai ∑M
m=0 βm where ai ∈ (0, a) for all i, β0 = 0, βm > 0
for all m, βm is strictly decreasing for all m ≥ L, and βL < min1≤m<L βm .
Proposition 10. There exists ε > 0 such that the value function V (·) in Example 2 satisfies the
hypotheses of Proposition 8 as long as the share of viewers not in I is no more than ε.
Proof. Strict monotonicity follows by the same argument as in the proof of Proposition 9. Now,
fix any j ∈ J , any S ⊂ J \ { j}, and any k ∈ J \(S ∪ { j}). Because each viewer i ∈ I sees ads on
both of any pair of outlets { j, k} ∈ J 2 with strictly positive probability, following the notation in
the proof of Proposition 9 we have that


i
i
P i → j, XS < XJ \{ j} |i ∈ I > 0.
Thus, since βm is strictly decreasing for all m ≥ L, and βL < min1≤m<L βm , we have
h
i
h
E ai 1i→ j βX i +1 |i ∈ I > E ai 1i→ j βX i

J \{ j}

S

i
|i
∈
I
.
+1

Now let
τ :=

min

j∈J ,S⊂J \{ j}

 h
i
h
E ai 1i→ j βX i +1 |i ∈ I − E ai 1i→ j βX i

J \{ j}

S

Let β = max1≤m<L βm . Let
ε=

τ
τ + aβ
62

> 0.

+1 |i ∈ I

i

> 0.

We claim that if P (i ∈
/ I) ≤ ε then V (·) satisfies that V (S ∪ Z) − V (S) ≥ V (J ) − V (J \Z) for
all Z ∈ Z, S ⊆ J \Z. Because owners are singletons, it suffices to consider any j ∈ J and any
S ⊂ J \ { j}. Note that
V (S ∪ { j}) −V (S) ≥ |I| · P (i ∈ I) E[ai 1i→ j βXS +1 |i ∈ I]


≥ |I| · P (i ∈ I) E[ai 1i→ j βXJ \{ j} +1 |i ∈ I] + τ


≥ |I| · P (i ∈ I) E[ai 1i→ j βXJ \{ j} +1 |i ∈ I] + P (i ∈
/ I) aβ


/ I) E[ai 1i→ j βXJ \{ j} +1 |i 6∈ I]
≥ |I| · P (i ∈ I) E[ai 1i→ j βXJ \{ j} +1 |i ∈ I] + P (i ∈
= V (J ) −V (J \ { j}),
where the second inequality follows from the construction of τ and the third inequality follows
from the fact that P (i ∈
/ I) ≤ ε.
Lastly, we show that analogues of Propositions 1 and 2 hold in a special case of Example 1 that is
analogous to the setting of Section 2.2.
Proposition 11. Consider a special case of Example 1 with ai = a for all i, and further impose the
structure in Section 2.2, where for each group g ∈ G, there is a set Lg ⊆ J such that Lg ≥ L and
ηg j = 1 for all j ∈ Lg . Then the conclusions of Propositions 1 and 2 hold.
Proof. We follow the same arguments and notation as in the proofs of Propositions 4 and 5. By
Propositions 8 and 9, we have only to characterize the incremental value for each owner Z.
For the conclusion of Proposition 1, recall that we use a monotone coupling in the proof
of Proposition 4. Under that coupling we have XJg \{ j,k} ≤ XJh \{ j,k} pointwise, where we recall that XJg \{ j,k} counts the random number of outlets not in { j, k} on which viewer g sees
ads. It follows that XJg \{ j,k} , XJh \{ j,k} ≥ L − 2 and so XJg \{ j,k} + 1, XJh \{ j,k} + 1 ≥ L − 1. Since
βL ≤ min1≤m<L βm ≤ βL−1 and βm is non-increasing in m for m ≥ L, βm is non-increasing in m for
m ≥ L −1. Since XJg \{ j,k} +1 ≤ XJh \{ j,k} +1 pointwise, we have βX g
+1 ≥ βXJh \{ j,k} +1 pointwise
J \{ j,k}


h
i
and so E βX g
+1 ≥ E βX h
+1 , which concludes the proof as before.
J \{ j,k}

J \{ j,k}

For the conclusion of Proposition 2, recall that XJg \{k} counts the random number of outlets
other than k on which viewer g sees ads. So XJg \{k} + 1 ≥ XJg \{ j,k} + 1 ≥ L − 1. Because βm is nonh
i
g
g
increasing in m for m ≥ L − 1, we have βX g
≥
β
pointwise
and
so
E
β
+1
XJ \{k} +1
XJ \{ j,k} +1 ≥
J \{ j,k}
h
i
E βX g +1 , which concludes the proof as before.
J \{k}

63

A.3.5

Heterogeneous Advertisers

Suppose now that each advertiser n ∈ N has a monotone and submodular value function Vn (·).
If outlets can post advertiser-specific prices, then the result is parallel to that in Theorem 1,
in the sense that the equilibrium price of owner Z’s bundle to advertiser n is given by vn,Z =
Vn (J )−Vn (J \ Z). If outlets cannot post advertiser-specific prices, then incremental pricing holds
if heterogeneity among the advertisers is sufficiently small compared to the incremental value of
a single outlet. Let vZ = minn∈N vn,Z and vZ = maxn∈N vn,Z denote the minimum and maximum
values of vn,Z , respectively, with respect to n. Let ϕ(Z) = minn∈N , j∈Z Vn ((J \Z) ∪ { j}) −Vn (J \Z)
denote the minimal incremental value of any one of owner Z’s outlets. In the special case where Z
is a single-outlet owner, ϕ(Z) = vZ .
Proposition 12. Suppose that heterogeneity in the value functions Vn (·) is small in the sense that
vZ − vZ ≤ N1 ϕ(Z) for all Z ∈ Z. Then there exists an efficient equilibrium, and in any efficient
equilibrium, all advertisers buy slots on all outlets, and p∗Z = vZ for all Z ∈ Z.
Proof. As in the proof of Theorem 1, we first construct an equilibrium. For any profile p of posted
prices (including those off of the equilibrium path), let pS denote the minimum price to buy slots
on all the outlets in S. Now let every advertiser n buy the bundle Sn∗ (p), chosen arbitrarily from the
set of solutions to the problem
max |S|
s.t. S ∈ argmax Vn (S) − pS
S⊆J

By construction, (S1∗ (·) , ..., SN∗ (·)) constitutes an equilibrium strategy profile for the advertisers.
Now, let each owner Z offer a single bundle consisting of all outlets in Z with a price pZ = vZ .
We only need to check that each owner has no profitable deviation. Observe that if pZ = vZ is
offered by some owner Z and there is no proper subset W ⊂ Z being offered, then any advertiser
will buy the bundle Z regardless of the prices posted by owners other than Z. This is because for
any S ⊆ J \Z, submodularity of Vn (·) implies that
Vn (S ∪ Z) −Vn (S) ≥ Vn (J ) −Vn (J \Z) ≥ min
Vn0 (J ) −Vn0 (J \Z) = vZ .
0
n ∈N

Fix an owner Z ∈ Z and suppose all other players follow the proposed strategy. We claim that
offering a single bundle Z with a price vZ is an optimal strategy for owner Z. To see this, consider
two cases.
Case 1: Suppose Z offers some set of bundles BZ such that every advertiser buys a slot on
every outlet in Z. Then the minimal price to buy all outlets in Z must be no more than vZ because
64

otherwise there is one advertiser who can profitably deviate by simply not buying anything in BZ .
Hence in this case the owner cannot do better than simply offering the bundle Z with a price vZ .
Case 2: Suppose Z offers some set of bundles BZ such that there exist at least one outlet j ∈ Z
and one advertiser ñ ∈ N such that advertiser ñ does not buy a slot on outlet j. The total revenue
that owner Z extracts is no more than
(
)
max
n, j

∑ vn0,Z + vn,Z\{ j}

n0 6=n

where vn,Z\{ j} = Vn (J ) −Vn (J \ (Z\ { j})) is the incremental value to advertiser n of the owner’s
outlets excluding outlet j. We also have that
(
max
n, j

)
vn0 ,Z + vn,Z\{ j}
∑
0

n 6=n



≤ max NvZ − vn,Z − vn,Z\{ j}
n, j

=NvZ − min {Vn ((J \Z) ∪ { j}) −Vn (J \Z)}
n, j

=NvZ − ϕ(Z)
≤NvZ − N(vZ − vZ ) = NvZ
where we have used the assumption that vZ − vZ ≤ N1 ϕ(Z). Hence the owner also cannot do better
than simply offering the bundle Z with a price vZ .
Thus the construction is an equilibrium. The outcome is efficient because all advertisers buy
slots on all outlets.
To prove the second part of the statement, fix any efficient equilibrium. All outlets must sell N
slots, because the preferences for each player are quasilinear in money and thus the total surplus is
maximized only if all potential trades are realized (recall K ≥ N). Then by the argument in Case 1,
we know that p∗Z ≤ vZ for all Z ∈ Z. Moreover, p∗Z cannot be strictly lower than vZ for any owner
Z, because if this were the case then it would be a profitable deviation for owner Z to offer a single
bundle Z with a price vZ − ε for ε > 0 small enough. Hence p∗Z = vZ for all Z ∈ Z.
Note that the hypothesis of Proposition 12 restricts the incremental values rather than the level
of Vn (·), in the sense that it allows for Vn (·) = V (·) + cn for any cn that preserves non-negativity.34
The restriction on incremental values becomes more demanding as the number of advertisers, N,
grows large.

34 When there are two or more owners, it also allows for V (∅) = V (∅) and V (J 0 ) = V (J 0 ) + c for ∅ 6= J 0 ⊆ J ,
n
n
n

where cn ≥ 0.

65

A.3.6

Unbundled Pricing

Suppose that each owner Z ∈ Z is endowed with a partition FZ of Z such that owner Z can offer a
bundle B ⊆ Z if and only if there exists C ∈ FZ such that B ⊆ C. For example, if FZ partitions owner
Z’s outlets into singletons, then the owner cannot bundle together ads on different outlets. Denote
by vSB = V (S) − V (S \ B) the incremental value of bundle B ⊆ S relative to set S ⊆ J . We refine
the notion of equilibrium by assuming that, when indifferent, owners break ties in favor of offering
fewer bundles, and each advertiser breaks ties by favoring owners according to a prespecified
ordering.
Proposition 13. In any equilibrium satisfying the tie-breaking rule, each bundle sold has a price
of p∗B = vSB , where S ⊆ J is the set of all outlets sold.
Proof. Let On denote advertiser n’s tie-breaking ordering over owners; that is, if indifferent among
one or more sets of bundles, advertiser n chooses in a manner that maximizes the payoffs of the
owners according to a lexicographic preference over owners defined by On .
If in some equilibrium advertiser n0 obtains a strictly greater payoff than advertiser n, advertiser n can improve their payoff by mimicking the strategy of advertiser n0 . It follows that in any
equilibrium all advertisers must obtain the same payoff.
Now, fix some equilibrium with advertiser payoff W and pricing profile p. For any set S ⊆ J ,
let pS be the minimum price to buy slots on all the outlets in S in the equilibrium.
We first prove that, analogous to Lemma 1(i), in the equilibrium all advertisers pay the same
total amount to any given owner Z. Suppose toward contradiction that there exists some owner
Z ∈ Z such that not all advertisers make the same total payment to Z. Let n be an advertiser whose
payment to owner Z in the supposed equilibrium is at least as large as any other advertiser’s, and
strictly larger than some other advertiser’s. Let SC be the set of outlets that advertiser n buys slots
on in the cell C ∈ FZ . Let owner Z deviate by offering the bundles B := {SC : SC 6= ∅,C ∈ FZ }

with prices pSC − ε : SC 6= ∅,C ∈ FZ for some ε > 0. Note that |B| ≥ 1 since advertiser n
pays a positive amount to owner Z. By buying all the bundles offered in this deviation of Z (and
imitating advertiser n’s choices at the on-path history in the supposed equilibrium), any advertiser
can obtain a payoff of W + ε|B|. Because any set of outlets an advertiser wants to buy slots on
after this deviation is also a valid choice at the on-path history, if an advertiser does not buy all
the bundles in B, then the advertiser gets at most W + ε(|B| − 1). Hence after this deviation, all
advertisers buy the bundles in B offered by Z. Because this is a profitable deviation for owner Z
when ε is small enough, we have a contradiction.
We next prove that every advertiser must buy the same set of bundles from any given owner
Z and that owner Z offers at most one bundle from each cell in FZ . Fix any owner Z ∈ Z
and any advertiser n ∈ N . Let SC be the set of outlets that advertiser n buys slots on in the
66

cell C ∈ FZ . Suppose that owner Z offers the bundles B := {SC : SC 6= ∅,C ∈ FZ } with prices

pSC : SC 6= ∅,C ∈ FZ . We claim that owner Z weakly increases their payoff with this strategy
compared to any equilibrium strategy. For each advertiser, this change restricts the set of possible choices while keeping at least one choice that maintains the equilibrium payoff (imitating the
choice of advertiser n at the on-path history in the equilibrium). Because at the on-path history all
advertisers pay the same total amount to Z, this change can only decrease owner Z’s payoff if there
is some advertiser n0 (not necessarily different from n) who now breaks ties in favor of some owner
that ranks higher than Z in On0 . However, that choice must also be made at the on-path history by
advertiser n0 due to the tie-breaking rule. But then advertiser n0 pays strictly less than advertiser n
to owner Z in the equilibrium, which contradicts what we previously showed.
Because an owner chooses to offer fewer bundles when indifferent, the above observation
implies that every advertiser must buy the same set of bundles from any given owner Z and that
owner Z offers at most one bundle from each cell in FZ . (Otherwise, owner Z may simply pick
an advertiser n who buys the smallest number of bundles from Z and offer the set of bundles
B as defined above to strictly decrease the total number of bundles offered without decreasing
payoff.) Then all advertisers buy slots on the same set of outlets (say S) and any owner Z offers
BZ := {S ∩ B : S ∩ B 6= ∅, B ∈ FZ } as the available bundles.
Therefore, in the second stage, the set of feasible bundles that advertisers can choose
{S ∩ B : S ∩ B 6= ∅, B ∈ FZ }Z∈Z
must be a partition of the set S. For any bundle B offered by any owner Z, by rationality of the
advertisers,
pB ≤ V (S) −V (S\B) = vSB .
Next we show that pB ≥ vSB . Supopse toward contradiction that there exist some owner Z and some
bundle B0 ∈ FZ , B0 ⊆ S such that pB0 < vSB0 . Consider the following deviation. Let owner Z offer all
bundles in BZ as in the equilibrium but change the price for each bundle B to p̃B = vSB − ε for some
ε > 0. We claim that after this deviation, all advertisers continue buying slots on the same outlets
from owner Z as in the equilibrium. Indeed, if an advertiser stops buying some bundle B ∈ BZ ,
then the advertiser can only choose S0 ⊆ S\B since the set of available bundles is a partition of S.
But submodularity of V (·) implies


V S0 ∪ B −V S0 ≥ V (S) −V (S\B) = vSB > p̃B .
Therefore owner Z can extract vSB − ε for each bundle B ∈ BZ from each advertiser. For ε sufficiently small, this is then a profitable deviation for owner Z since in the equilibrium we have

67

pB ≤ vSB for all B ∈ BZ and pB0 < vSB0 for some bundle B0 ∈ BZ . We therefore have contradiction.

A.3.7

Bargaining between Owners and Advertisers

Suppose that rather than simultaneously posting prices, owners bargain with advertisers a la Nashin-Nash (Lee, Whinston, and Yurukoglu 2021). We follow the notation in Lee, Whinston, and
Yurukoglu (2021). For each owner Z and each advertiser n, let
CZn := {(B, p) : B ⊆ Z, p ∈ R+ }
be the contract space, with an element denoted by CZn . For a contract CZn , let B (CZn ) and p (CZn )
denote the associated bundle and price. Let C0 = {(∅, 0)} denote the null contract. For a given set
of contracts C := {CZn }Z∈Z,n=1,...,N , owner Z’s payoff is given by
ΠZ (C) = ∑ p (CZn )
n

and advertiser n’s payoff is given by
!
Πn (C) = V

[

B (CZn ) − ∑ p (CZn ) .
Z∈Z

Z∈Z

Given the set of contracts C−Zn excluding pair (Z, n), let
+
CZn
(C−Zn ) = {CZn ∈ CZn : Πn ({CZn , C−Zn }) − Πn ({C0 , C−Zn }) ≥ 0}

be the set of contracts between Z and n that give non-negative gains from trade to owner Z and
advertiser n (note that only the constraint for the advertiser is relevant as any contract would give
non-negative gains from trade to owner Z). Recall that a set of contracts Ĉ is a Nash-in-Nash
equilibrium if:
(i) For all Z, n such that ĈZn 6= C0 ,
ĈZn ∈

argmax [ΠZ ({CZn , Ĉ−Zn })−ΠZ ({C0 , Ĉ−Zn })]ξZ [Πn ({CZn , Ĉ−Zn })−Πn ({C0 , Ĉ−Zn })]1−ξZ ,
+
CZn ∈CZn
(Ĉ−Zn )

where ξZ ∈ [0, 1] denotes the bargaining weight for owner Z.

+
(ii) For all Z, n such that ĈZn = C0 , there is no contract in CZn
Ĉ−Zn that gives strictly
positive gains from trade to both Z and n.

68

Proposition 14. If all owners have identical bargaining weights, there exists a Nash-in-Nash equilibrium in which all advertisers buy slots on all outlets, and the payment by each advertiser to each
owner Z is proportional to vZ . If V (·) is strictly monotone, then this outcome is unique.
Proof. We first show that Ĉ := {(Z, ξZ vZ )} is a Nash-in-Nash equilibrium. Condition (ii) clearly
holds. For (i), note that
ΠZ ({CZn , Ĉ−Zn }) − ΠZ ({C0 , Ĉ−Zn }) = p (CZn )
and
Πn ({CZn , Ĉ−Zn }) − Πn ({C0 , Ĉ−Zn }) = V (B (CZn ) ∪ (J \Z)) −V (J \Z) − p (CZn ) .
Because V (·) is monotone, a solution to the Nash bargaining problem is given by B (CZn ) = Z and
p (CZn ) = ξZ (V (J ) −V (J \Z)). This proves that Ĉ is a Nash-in-Nash equilibrium.
For uniqueness, suppose that V (·) is strictly monotone and fix any Nash-in-Nash equilibrium
C̃. For any Z and n, regardless of C̃−Zn , given that V (·) is strictly monotone, any solution to the
Nash bargaining problem must have B (CZn ) = Z. Therefore, for any Z and n, any solution to the
Nash bargaining problem must have p (CZn ) = ξZ (V (J ) −V (J \Z)), proving the claim.
Lastly, observe that when ξZ = ξ for all Z ∈ Z, the payments to each owner under Ĉ are
proportional to vZ .
A.3.8

Auctioning of Advertising Slots

Suppose that rather than simultaneously posting prices, owners simultaneously set reserve prices
for each of their bundles, and then conduct simultaneous first-price auctions.
Proposition 15. If owners simultaneously set reserve prices and then conduct simultaneous firstprice auctions, there exists an equilibrium, and in any equilibrium all advertisers buy slots on all
outlets, and the payment by each advertiser to each owner Z is given by vZ .
Proof. Fix any profile of announced reserve prices p := {pB : B ⊆ Z, Z ∈ Z}. For any advertiser,
bidding strictly above the reserve price for any bundle B is strictly dominated by bidding at the
reserve price pB , because in both cases the advertiser is guaranteed to win the bundle (as K ≥ N).
Thus, for any bundle B, each advertiser either bids at the reserve price for that bundle, or bids
below the reserve price and loses the auction. Therefore, after eliminating the strictly dominated
strategies for the advertisers, this game is strategically equivalent to the pricing game of our main
model. Hence, the claim follows directly from Theorem 1.

69

Now, in addition, we further characterize equilibrium in a model where owners conduct auctions, advertising slots are scarce, and advertisers’ valuations are heterogeneous. Suppose that each
owner owns one outlet, and identify each owner with the outlet j that the owner owns. Suppose
further that each outlet has K slots, where K < N (so ad slots are scarce). The advertisers are heterogeneous, with value functions given by αnV (·) where V (·) is monotone and submodular with
V (∅) = 0. We order the advertisers so that α1 > α2 > · · · > αN > 0. We assume that
αK+1V ({ j}) < αK (V (J ) −V (J \ { j})) ∀ j ∈ J .

(A1)

Each owner runs a uniform price auction in which the K slots are allocated to the K highest
bidders at a price equal to the (K + 1)th highest bid, with ties broken in favor of advertisers with
higher αn . The auctions happen simultaneously. Each advertiser simultaneously submits bids to
every auction. We take an equilibrium to be a Nash equilibrium in pure strategies. We say an
equilibrium is owner-optimal if there is no other equilibrium that gives weakly higher payoffs to
all owners and strictly higher payoff to at least one owner. We say an equilibrium is efficient if the
equilibrium allocation maximizes total surplus among all possible allocations.
Proposition 16. Suppose that Assumption (A1) holds. Then, there exists an efficient owner-optimal
equilibrium, and in every efficient owner-optimal equilibrium, for every owner j, the clearing price
of auction j is αK (V (J ) −V (J \ { j})).
Proof. Consider the following strategy profile: in every auction j, each advertiser n ≤ K bids
αn (V (J ) − V (J \ { j})); advertiser K + 1 bids αK (V (J ) − V (J \ { j})); and each advertiser n >
K + 1 bids 0.
We show that this is an equilibrium. Fix any j and any advertiser n with n ≤ K. Because
this is a (K + 1)-th price auction, the advertiser cannot influence the price it pays conditional on
winning. Regardless of the choices the advertiser makes on other auctions, the advertiser weakly
prefers to win auction j at the price of αK (V (J ) − V (J \ { j})) rather than to lose the auction at
that price because for any S ⊆ J \ { j}, we have
αn (V (S ∪ { j}) −V (S)) ≥ αK (V (S ∪ { j}) −V (S)) ≥ αK (V (J ) −V (J \ { j})),
where we have used submodularity of V (·). Therefore, advertiser n has no profitable deviation.
Next, fix any j and any advertiser n with n > K. Note that advertiser n loses every auction under the proposed strategy profile. Also note that to win auction j, advertiser n has to pay
αK (V (J ) − V (J \ { j})). However, regardless of the choices the advertiser makes on other auctions, the advertiser strictly prefers not to win auction j at this price, because for any S ⊆ J \ { j},

70

we have
αn (V (S ∪ { j}) −V (S)) ≤ αnV ({ j}) ≤ αK+1V ({ j}) < αK (V (J ) −V (J \ { j})) ,
where we have used submodularity of V (·) and Assumption (A1). Therefore, advertiser n has no
profitable deviation.
Now, we show that this equilibrium is owner-optimal. Suppose toward contradiction that there
is another equilibrium that gives some owner j a strictly higher payoff and all other owners weakly
higher payoffs. Fix any such equilibrium E 0 . By the argument above, no advertiser n with n > K
would want to win auction j at a price strictly higher than αK (V (J ) −V (J \ { j})). Therefore, the
K winning bidders in auction j must be advertisers 1, . . . , K. However, at a price strictly higher
than αK (V (J ) − V (J \ { j})) for auction j, advertiser K must lose some auction j0 6= j, because
otherwise the advertiser can profitably deviate to losing auction j. Then, since there are K winners
in auction j0 , there must be an advertiser n0 with n0 > K who wins auction j0 . For owner j0 to
have a weakly higher payoff in equilibrium E 0 than in the original equilibrium, the clearing price
in auction j0 must be weakly higher than αK (V (J ) − V (J \ { j0 })). But then advertiser n0 can
profitably deviate to losing auction j0 by the argument above, which is a contradiction.
We claim that the allocation of ad slots to advertisers under this equilibrium is the unique
efficient allocation. To see this, fix any efficient allocation x and suppose toward contradiction that
x differs from the allocation under the equilibrium. Then, it must be that some advertiser n ≤ K is
not allocated to an ad slot on some outlet j, which means that some advertiser n0 > K is allocated
to an ad slot on outlet j. Consider an allocation x̃ that is the same as x except that it allocates the
ad slot on outlet j to n instead of n0 . We claim that this change strictly increases the total surplus.
Indeed, let S be the set of outlets whose slots are assigned to advertiser n under allocation x, and
similarly define S0 for advertiser n0 . Then,
αn (V (S ∪ { j}) −V (S)) ≥ αK (V (J ) −V (J \ { j}))

> αK+1V ({ j}) ≥ αn0 V (S0 ) −V (S0 \ { j}) ,
where we have used submodularity of V (·) and Assumption (A1). Therefore,
αnV (S ∪ { j}) + αn0 V (S0 \ { j}) > αnV (S) + αn0 V (S0 ),
and hence x̃ gives a strictly higher total surplus than x, which is a contradiction.
Finally, fix any efficient owner-optimal equilibrium. By efficiency and the argument above,
the winning bidders in every auction must be advertisers 1, . . . , K. If there is any auction j in which
the clearing price is strictly higher than αK (V (J ) −V (J \ { j})), then advertiser K can profitably
71

deviate to losing auction j. Therefore, in every auction j, the clearing price must be weakly lower
than αK (V (J ) −V (J \ { j})). Now, if there is any auction j0 in which the clearing price is strictly
lower than αK (V (J ) − V (J \ { j0 })), the equilibrium cannot be owner-optimal, because we have
just shown an equilibrium that has clearing prices equal to αK (V (J ) −V (J \ { j})) for all j. Thus,
in every efficient owner-optimal equilibrium, the clearing price in every auction j must be exactly
αK (V (J ) −V (J \ { j})).
A.3.9

Competition between Advertisers

We consider a setting in which each owner owns a single outlet and advertisers make purchasing
decisions sequentially in random order. We modify the value function V (·) as follows. Let advertiser n’s value for buying ads on the set of outlets Sn be V (Sn , ~S−n ), where ~S−n ∈ J N−1 is the vector
0 if each entry of the vector is smaller in the
of sets bought by other advertisers. We say ~S−n ≤ ~S−n
set-inclusion order. Since all owners are single-outlet owners, we use j to denote both an outlet
~ be the vector of length N − 1 with J in each entry,
and the owner associated with the outlet. Let J
−−−−→
and J \{ j} be the vector of length N − 1 with J \{ j} in each entry. We impose two assumptions:
V (J , ~S) −V (J \{ j}, ~S) ≥ V (J , ~S0 ) −V (J \{ j}, ~S0 ) for any ~S ≤ ~S0 and j;



−−−−→
−−−−→
1 
~ ) −V (J \{ j}, J
~ ) for any j.
V (J , J
V (J , J \{ j}) −V (J \{ j}, J \{ j}) ≤ 1 +
N

(A2)
(A3)

~ ) −V (J \{ j}, J
~ ) denote the modified incremental value of outlet j in this setting.
Let ṽ j = V (J , J
Proposition 17. Suppose that V ( · , ~S) is monotone and submodular for any ~S, and that V (·, ·)
satisfies (A2 ) and (A3). Then there exists an equilibrium in which all advertisers buy slots on all
outlets, and the price for outlet j is p∗j = ṽ j .
Proof. We construct an equilibrium as follows. Let each owner j announce price ṽ j . For each
profile of prices p announced (including off-the-equilibrium-path histories), the subgame in the
second stage is a finite extensive-form game and hence admits an equilibrium by backward induction. When doing the backward induction, if an advertiser is indifferent between different sets of
outlets to buy slots on, we pick one with the largest cardinality. Now we verify that no owner has
a profitable deviation.
Observe that at any history, if p j = ṽ j is offered by an owner j ∈ J , then any advertiser will
buy a slot on outlet j regardless of p− j and what other advertisers do. This is because for any
~,
S ⊆ J \{ j} and any ~S−n ≤ J
~ ) −V (J \{ j}, J
~)
V (S ∪ { j}, ~S−n ) −V (S, ~S−n ) ≥ V (J , ~S−n ) −V (J \{ j}, ~S−n ) ≥ V (J , J
72

where we have used submodularity of V (·, ~S−n ) and Assumption (A2 ). Further, when all other
advertisers buy slots on all outlets, the incremental value for an advertiser to buy a slot on some
~ ) −V (J \{ j}, J
~ ). Therefore, at the proposed price profile, for any outlet
outlet j is exactly V (J , J
j, each advertiser is indifferent between buying and not buying a slot on outlet j in the proposed
equilibrium.
Now fix any owner j ∈ J . Suppose all other players follow the proposed strategy. Owner j is
selling N slots by announcing price ṽ j and clearly has no incentive to decrease the price. Consider
the deviation of raising the price. By the earlier observation, all advertisers would continue buying
−−−−→
slots on outlets in J \{ j}. Therefore, by (A2 ), owner j cannot extract more than V (J , J \{ j}) −
−−−−→
V (J \{ j}, J \{ j}) from any advertiser. Further, we claim that at least one advertiser would stop
buying the slot on outlet j after the price increase, because if not, the last advertiser to move can
profitably deviate by buying only the slots on the outlets in J \{ j}. Thus there are at most N − 1
advertisers buying a slot on outlet j. Hence owner j’s revenue is at most



−−−−→
−−−−→ 
→
−
→
− 
1 
V (J , J ) −V (J \{ j}, J ) ≤ N ṽ j
(N −1) V (J , J \{ j}) −V (J \{ j}, J \{ j}) ≤ (N −1) 1 +
N
where the first inequality is due to (A3). So there is no profitable deviation for owner j. Since this
holds for any owner, the construction is an equilibrium.
A.3.10

Incentive to Invest in Content

Suppose that there is a set of viewers I. Each viewer i ∈ I is attracted to each owner Z’s content
with probability αiZ ∈ [0, 1]. If a viewer i is attracted to owner Z’s content, the viewer sees ads
on outlets j ∈ Z with probability ηi j ∈ (0, 1), independently across j, and other details follow the
reach-only model. Prior to the game specified in Section 2, each owner simultaneously announces
0 (0) = 0 and
a choice of αiZ for all viewers i, paying a content cost ∑i∈I CiZ (αiZ ) where CiZ (0) = CiZ
0
0 (1) > a , for C (·) the first derivative of C (·). For a given investment profile {(α )
CiZ
i
iZ
iZ i∈I }Z∈Z ,
iZ
a viewer i, and an owner Z, let ViZ ( · ; α) denote the value function induced by the viewing probabilities of viewer i conditional on viewer i being attracted to owner Z.
Proposition 18. Suppose the investment profile {(αiZ )i∈I }Z∈Z is an equilibrium. Then,
0
CiZ
(αiZ ) = ViZ (J ; α) −ViZ (J \Z; α) = ai ηiZ ∏ (1 − αiZ 0 ηiZ 0 ) .
Z 0 6=Z

Proof. For a given investment profile α, by Theorem 1, the equilibrium payments in the subgame
are given by

p∗Z (α) = ∑ αiZ ViZ (J ; α) −ViZ (J \Z; α) .
i

73

So when making investment choices, owner Z maximizes the objective

∑ αiZ ViZ (J ; α) −ViZ (J \Z; α) − ∑ CiZ (αiZ ),


i

i

which is differentiable in (αiZ ) i∈I , and where ViZ (J ; α) − ViZ (J \Z; α) does not depend on αiZ .
For owner Z, the first order condition for αiZ is given by
0
CiZ
(αiZ ) = ViZ (J ; α) −ViZ (J \Z; α) .
0 (1) > a ≥ V Z (J ; α) − V Z (J \Z; α) for all α, i, and Z, in any equilibrium no owner Z
Since CiZ
i
i
i
0 (0) = 0 and η > 0, in any equilibrium no
will choose αiZ = 1 for any viewer i. Then, since CiZ
iZ
owner Z will choose αiZ = 0 for any viewer i. Hence, in any equilibrium, the above first order
condition must hold for all i and all Z. The form of ViZ (J ; α) −ViZ (J \Z; α) follows by Corollary
1.
0 (1) = p∗ for all
In the (unattainable) limiting case where αiZ = 1 for all Z ∈ Z, we have that CiZ
iZ
Z.

A.4

Alternative Models with Declining Audience

In this section, we present two alternative models for ad markets, and show that these models
cannot generate rising ad revenues with declining audience, even though they can generate rising
prices.
A.4.1

Heterogeneous Advertisers with Additively Separable Values

Here we interpret declining audience as a decline in advertisers’ separable valuations for outlets.
Consider a special case of the extension in A.3.5 with heterogeneous advertisers in which each
owner owns a single outlet j ∈ J and each advertiser n ∈ N has value Vn (·) such that
Vn (S) = ∑ Vn ({ j})
j∈S

for any S ⊆ J .
Proposition 19. Consider two markets M and M̃, one in which the advertisers’ values are Vn
and the other in which the advertisers’ values are Ṽn . Suppose that Ṽn ≤ Vn for all advertisers n.
Then the total ad revenue in any equilibrium of market M̃ must be weakly lower than the total ad
revenue in any equilibrium of market M.

74

Proof. We show that for any outlet j, its ad revenue must be lower in market M̃. Note that
because each advertiser has an additively separable value function, the pricing problem for outlet
j, regardless of how other outlets price, is equivalent to the pricing problem where the N advertisers
have values Vn ({ j}). Now, note that for any price p,
p · ∑ 1Vn ({ j})≥p ≥ p · ∑ 1Ṽn ({ j})≥p .
n

n

Thus, for any price p,




0

sup p · ∑ 1Vn ({ j})≥p0
p0

n

≥ p · ∑ 1Ṽn ({ j})≥p .
n

Therefore, we have




0

sup p · ∑ 1Vn ({ j})≥p0
p0

n





≥ sup p · ∑ 1Ṽn ({ j})≥p
p

.

n

The left-hand side is the ad revenue for outlet j in any equilibrium of market M, and the right-hand
side is the ad revenue for outlet j in any equilibrium of market M̃ . The claim follows.
Proposition 19 does not preclude that the equilibrium price for any outlet j can be higher
in market M̃ than in market M. For example, suppose that there are two advertisers such that
V1 = V2 − ε > 0 in market M, and Ṽ1 = 0 and Ṽ2 = V2 in market M̃. For ε > 0 small enough, the
equilibrium price for each outlet is greater in market M̃ than in market M.
A.4.2

Falling Supply of Ad Slots

Here we interpret declining audience as a decrease in the total supply of ad slots K. Suppose
that the advertisers are heterogeneous. Specifically, each advertiser n values the number of total
impressions at bn per impression, and has a budget constraint cn . We use perfect competition as a
solution concept, so that a price per impression p∗ is an equilibrium if and only if
D (p∗ ) = K
where D (·) is the aggregate market demand for ad slots, with D (p) = ∑n∈N Dn (p) = 1p ∑n∈N cn 1bn ≥p
for any price p ≥ 0.
Proposition 20. Consider two markets M and M̃, one in which the supply of ad slots is K and
the other in which the supply of ad slots is K̃. Suppose that K̃ < K. Then the total ad revenue in
any equilibrium of market M̃ must be weakly lower than the total ad revenue in any equilibrium
of market M, although the price per impression in any equilibrium of market M̃ must be weakly
greater than the price per impression in any equilibrium of market M.
75

Proof. At any equilibrium price p∗ for market M, we have that
1
cn 1bn ≥p∗ = K .
p∗ ∑
n
At any equilibrium price p̃∗ for market M̃, we have that
1
cn 1bn ≥ p̃∗ = K̃ .
p̃∗ ∑
n
It follows by inspection that p̃∗ ≥ p∗ because K̃ < K. We also observe that revenues are weakly
lower in market M̃ because
p̃∗ K̃ = ∑ cn 1bn ≥ p̃∗ ≤ ∑ cn 1bn ≥p∗ = p∗ K
n

n

and p̃∗ ≥ p∗ .

76

B

Additional Empirical Results

77

Appendix Figure 1: Sensitivity to Alternative Samples
Price per impression vs.
audience activity
audience size
Baseline

log(price per impression)

log(price per impression)

−4.5

−5.0

−5.5

−6.0

−5.3

−5.5

−5.7

−6.5
−5.9
3.4

3.6

3.8

4.0

4.2

12

log(weekly viewing time of audience)

14

16

18

log(impressions per hour)

Alternative sample years
2014

log(price per impression)

log(price per impression)

−4.5

−5.0

−5.5

−6.0

−5.3

−5.5

−5.7

−6.5
−5.9
3.4

3.6

3.8

4.0

4.2

12

log(weekly viewing time of audience)

2016

14

16

18

log(impressions per hour)

log(price per impression)

log(price per impression)

−4.5

−5.0

−5.5

−6.0

−5.3

−5.5

−5.7

−6.5
−5.9
3.4

3.6

3.8

4.0

4.2

log(weekly viewing time of audience)

12

14

16

18

log(impressions per hour)

Notes: Within a given row, both plots are based on the same regression specification. The row labeled “Baseline” corresponds to the main
specification in the paper, with the plot “Price per impression vs. audience activity” corresponding to Panel B of Figure 2 and the plot “Price per
impression vs. audience size” corresponding to Panel B of Figure 4. The rows under the header “Alternative sample years” present results for
alternative sample years.

78

Appendix Figure 2: Sensitivity to Alternative Outlet Definitions
Price per impression vs.
audience activity
audience size
Baseline

log(price per impression)

log(price per impression)

−4.5

−5.0

−5.5

−6.0

−5.3

−5.5

−5.7

−6.5
−5.9
3.4

3.6

3.8

4.0

4.2

12

log(weekly viewing time of audience)

14

16

18

log(impressions per hour)

Alternative definition of outlet
Network

log(price per impression)

log(price per impression)

−4.5

−5.0

−5.5

−6.0

−6.5
3.6

−5.4

−5.6

−5.8

−6.0
3.7

3.8

3.9

4.0

14

log(weekly viewing time of audience)

Broadcast program

15

16

17

log(impressions per hour)

log(price per impression)

log(price per impression)

−3.5

−4.0

−4.5

−4

−5

−6
Audience Survey
Full

−5.0
3.1

3.2

3.3

3.4

3.5

log(weekly viewing time of audience)

12

15

18

21

24

log(impressions per hour)

Notes: Within a given row, both plots are based on the same regression specification. The row labeled “Baseline” corresponds to the main
specification in the paper, with the plot “Price per impression vs. audience activity” corresponding to Panel B of Figure 2 and the plot “Price per
impression vs. audience size” corresponding to Panel B of Figure 4. The rows under the header “Alternative definition of outlet” consider different
outlet definitions. In the row labeled “Network” an outlet j is a network. In the “Network” row, the “Price per impression vs. audience activity”
specification includes controls for the share of total impressions that are to adults and for indicators of deciles of audience size, and the “Price per
impression vs. audience size” specification includes controls for the share of total impressions that are to adults and for indicators of deciles of
audience activity. In the row labeled “Broadcast program” an outlet j is a broadcast program, with bins corresponding to 15 quantiles of the full
sample of broadcast programs (3055 programs) colored black and bins corresponding to deciles of the subsample of broadcast programs included
in the audience survey (173 programs) colored gray. In the “Broadcast program” row, the “Price per impression vs. audience activity” specification
includes controls for the share of total impressions that are to adults and for indicators of deciles of audience size, and the “Price per impression vs.
audience size” specification includes a control for the share of total impressions that are to adults.

79

Appendix Figure 3: Sensitivity to Alternative Controls
Price per impression vs.
audience activity
audience size
Baseline
log(price per impression)

log(price per impression)

−4.5

−5.0

−5.5

−6.0

−5.3

−5.5

−5.7

−6.5
−5.9
3.4

3.6

3.8

4.0

4.2

12

log(weekly viewing time of audience)

14

16

18

log(impressions per hour)

Alternative controls
Income

−5.2

log(price per impression)

log(price per impression)

−4.5

−5.0

−5.5

−6.0

−5.4

−5.6

−5.8

−6.5

3.6

3.8

4.0

4.2

13

log(weekly viewing time of audience)

Attentiveness

−5.0

−5.5

−6.0

16

17

−5.4

−5.6

−5.8

−6.5

3.6

3.8

4.0

4.2

13

log(weekly viewing time of audience)

14

15

16

17

log(impressions per hour)

−4.5

−5.2

log(price per impression)

log(price per impression)

15

−5.2

log(price per impression)

log(price per impression)

−4.5

Attitude

14

log(impressions per hour)

−5.0

−5.5

−6.0

−5.4

−5.6

−5.8

−6.5

3.6

3.8

4.0

4.2

log(weekly viewing time of audience)

13

14

15

16

17

log(impressions per hour)

Notes: Within a given row, both plots are based on the same regression specification. The row labeled “Baseline” corresponds to the main
specification in the paper, with the plot “Price per impression vs. audience activity” corresponding to Panel B of Figure 2 and the plot “Price per
impression vs. audience size” corresponding to Panel B of Figure 4. The rows under the header “Alternative controls” consider different sets of
control variables. The row labeled “Income” adds controls for indicators for deciles of the average household income of adult impressions. The row
labeled “Attentiveness” adds controls for indicators for deciles of the time-weighted average attentiveness of the outlet’s viewers, where a viewer’s
attentiveness is the viewer’s average self-reported attentiveness across broadcast and cable programs, coded as some (0.5), most (0.75), or full (1),
and measured for each program relative to the mean among all respondents who rate the program. The row labeled “Attitude” adds controls for
indicators for deciles of the time-weighted average of viewers’ attitudes toward television advertising, where a viewer’s attitude toward advertising
is measured as the first principal component of the viewer’s responses (on a five-point scale) to a series of eight questions about TV advertising.

80

Appendix Figure 3: Sensitivity to Alternative Controls (continued)
Price per impression vs.
audience activity
audience size
Baseline
log(price per impression)

log(price per impression)

−4.5

−5.0

−5.5

−6.0

−5.3

−5.5

−5.7

−6.5
−5.9
3.4

3.6

3.8

4.0

4.2

12

log(weekly viewing time of audience)

14

16

18

log(impressions per hour)

Alternative controls
Industry

−5.2

log(price per impression)

log(price per impression)

−4.5

−5.0

−5.5

−6.0

−5.4

−5.6

−5.8

−6.5

3.6

3.8

4.0

4.2

log(weekly viewing time of audience)

13

14

15

16

17

log(impressions per hour)

Notes: Within a given row, both plots are based on the same regression specification. The row labeled “Baseline” corresponds to the main
specification in the paper, with the plot “Price per impression vs. audience activity” corresponding to Panel B of Figure 2 and the plot “Price per
impression vs. audience size” corresponding to Panel B of Figure 4. The rows under the header “Alternative controls” consider different sets of
control variables. The row labeled “Industry” adds controls for the share of the outlet’s adult impressions that are to ads whose advertisers are in
each of 11 industry categories: automotive; business and consumer services; business supplies; drugs and remedies; entertainment; food and drink;
home and garden; insurance and real estate; retail; travel; and other.

81

Appendix Figure 4: Average Television Viewing Hours Per Day by Age and Gender

Average daily television hours

6

Gender
Men
Women

4

2

0
18−24

25−34

35−44

45−54

55−64

65+

Age

Notes: The figure shows the average daily viewing hours spent on television across age groups by gender.

82

Appendix Figure 5: Fit of Quantitative Model Under Imperfect Diminishing Returns

Panel B: Model with value proportional to income

1.00

1.00

0.75

0.75

Fit

Fit

Panel A: Baseline model with homogeneous value

0.50

0.25

0.50

0.25

83
0.00

Perfect diminishing returns
0.0

0.2

0.00

0.4

0.6

Decay factor ( β )
R2

0.8

1.0

Perfect diminishing returns
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

Decay factor ( β )
R2

1 Slope

0.8

1.0

1 Slope

Notes: In each plot we depict the fit of a model-based prediction of advertising prices (y-axis) as a function of the extent of diminishing returns from advertising
M
m−1 for
assumed
 in the model (x-axis). To produce the plot, we parameterize the viewer-level model with a single format such that u(M) = ∑m=1 βm where βm = β
m ∈ 1, ..., M , βm = 0 for m > M, and β ∈ [0, 1]. Here, β describes the extent of diminishing returns, with β = 0 denoting the special case of the reach-only model
th

and β = 1 denoting the special case of no diminishing returns up to the M impression. We assume that M = 10 and calculate ηi j as described in Section 5. We
calculate the log(price per viewer) implied by the model for each value β ∈ {0, 0.1, ..., 1} depicted on the x-axis. We then regress the log(price per impression) of
a 30-second spot observed in the data, as described in Section 3.1, against the log(price per viewer) predicted by the model and depict on the y-axis the R2 of the
regression and the multiplicative inverse of the estimated slope. Panel A uses log(price per viewer) predicted from the baseline model in which advertisers’ value
of a first impression is homogeneous across viewers. Panel B uses log(price per viewer) predicted from the model in which advertisers’ value of a first impression
is proportional to a viewer’s income. The unit of analysis for the regression is an owner Z, and all variables in the regression are residualized with respect to the
share of the owner’s impressions that are to adults.

Appendix Figure 6: Observed and Predicted Television Advertising Revenues, Alternate Estimates of
Impressions
Panel A: Observed trends
Measure
Price per impression
Total impressions
Total revenue

1.2

Normalized value

1.1

1.0

0.9

0.8

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2018

2019

Year

Panel B: Predicted trends
Measure
Price per impression
Total impressions
Total revenue

1.2

Normalized value

1.1

1.0

0.9

0.8

2014

2015

2016

2017

Year

Notes: Each plot depicts trends in the television advertising market over the sample period. We plot trends in total
revenue, total impressions, and price per impression (total revenues divided by total impressions), all normalized
relative to their 2015 value. In Panel A, all series are as observed in the data, as described in Section 3.1, and
revenue is deflated to 2015 dollars using the US Consumer Price Index (Organization for Economic Co-operation and
Development 2022). In Panel B, the trends in revenue and impressions are predicted by the baseline model in which
advertisers’ value of a first impression is homogeneous across viewers, as described in Section 5.

84

Appendix Figure 7: Predicted Television Advertising Revenues, Strong Cross-Format Diminishing Returns

Measure
Price per impression
Total impressions
Total revenue

1.2

Normalized value

1.1

1.0

0.9

0.8

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

Year
Notes: The plot depicts trends in total revenue, total impressions, and price per impression (total revenues divided
by total impressions), all normalized relative to their 2015 value. Total revenue is is predicted by the cross-format
reach-only model defined in Section 6 where φ = 1 such that diminishing returns operate just as strongly between as
within formats. Total impressions are as observed in the data, as described in Section 3.1. Price per impression is
calculated as the ratio of the predicted revenue to total impressions.

85

Appendix Figure 8: Measures of Online Activity by Age and Gender

Share of social websites visited in past 30 days

Panel A: Share of social media sites visited in the past 30 days
0.6
Gender
Men
Women

0.4

0.2

0.0
18−24

25−34

35−44

45−54

55−64

65+

Age

Panel B: Average internet hours per day
Gender

Average daily internet hours

4

Men
Women

3

2

1

0
18−24

25−34

35−44

45−54

55−64

65+

Age

Notes: Panel A shows the average share of five social media sites (Facebook, Instagram, Reddit, Twitter and
YouTube) visited in the past 30 days across age groups by gender. Panel B shows average daily hours spent
on the internet across age groups by gender.

86

Appendix Figure 9: Demographic Premia (Per Click) and Viewing Time on Facebook
Panel A: Data from our experiment

Gender
Men
Women

log(price per click)

−0.6

−0.8

−1.0

−1.2
20

30

40

50

60

70

Age

Panel B: Data from Allcott et al. (2020b)

Gender
Men
Women

log(price per click)

−1.25

−1.50

−1.75

20

30

40

50

60

70

Age
Notes: The plot shows the log(price per click) for advertisement sets targeted to a given gender and age
group. In Panel A, the data are taken from our own experiment, and the groups are {Men, Women} ×
{18-24, 25-34, 35-44, 45-54, 55-64, 65+}. In Panel B, the the data are taken from Allcott et al. (2020b), and the
groups are {Men, Women}×{18-24, 25-44, 45-64, 65+}. In both panels, the y-axis value is the log(price per click)
for advertisement sets targeting the given group, and the x-axis value is the midpoint of the age range for the given
group, treating 70 as the midpoint for ages 65+.

87

Appendix Figure 10: Advertising Prices and Demographics of Digital Platforms
Panel A: Average age
wsj.com

Vevo
WWE
disney.com

CNET
Univision

log(price per impression)

Disney XD

CNN

Fandango

Ticketmaster

Popsugar

−5

Reuters

Disney Channel

NBA

BleacherReport.com

NBC

CBS

WebMD

NASCAR

TheStreet Fox.com/FOX NOW
CNBC

CBSSports

CBSNews

NBCSports.com Fox News

NFL.com or NFL/NFL Mobile

PBS
FOX Sports
BBC.com WeatherBug
NBCNews
bankrate.com
ABC
About.com
Yahoo! Answers
SportingNews.com
Yahoo! News Yahoo! Finance
Whitepages
HuffingtonPost.com/HuffPost
Yahoo! en Español AccuWeather
Weather Underground (wunderground.com)
Moviefone
IMDb

MTV
BuzzFeed

Yahoo! Sports

−7
MSN Money

−9

MSN Entertainment

35

40

45

50

Average age of viewers

Panel B: Share female
NBA

wsj.com

WWE

NASCAR

BleacherReport.com

Vevo

log(price per impression)

CBSSports

CNET

TheStreet

FOX Sports

Fandango
CBS
Disney XD

CBSNews

CNBC
NBCSports.com

NBC

Fox.com/FOX NOW

Reuters

IMDb

Fox News

−5 NFL.com or NFL/NFL Mobile Yahoo! Finance

NBCNews

Ticketmaster

WeatherBug

bankrate.com
SportingNews.com Yahoo! Sports

Weather Underground (wunderground.com)

−7

PBS

AccuWeather
Yahoo! News

Disney Channel

WebMD

Univision

BBC.com CNN

MTV

disney.com

Popsugar

About.com

ABC

BuzzFeed

Whitepages
HuffingtonPost.com/HuffPost Yahoo! en Español
Yahoo! Answers

Moviefone

MSN Money

−9

MSN Entertainment

25

50

75

Share of female viewers

Notes: Each plot is a scatterplot of the log(price per impression) of display advertising on a platform against the demographic characteristics of the platform’s viewers. We construct the price per impression by computing the ratio of
total revenue to total impressions across all display ads on the platform reported in AdIntel 2017 (The Nielsen Company 2022). The sample of platforms is the set of platforms that AdIntel 2017 (The Nielsen Company 2022) classifies
as Entertainment, Finance, Information/Reference, News/Commentary, Spanish, Sports, Technology, or Weather, excluding some platforms such as those that focus primarily on direct sales of products or services. The x-axis shows
the average age (Panel A) or share female (Panel B) of those who report visiting the platform in the previous 30 days
in GfK MRI’s 2017 Survey of the American Consumer (GfK Mediamark Research and Intelligence 2019).

88

Appendix Figure 11: Fit of Quantitative Model of Television Prices with Social Media Competition

Panel B: Model with value proportional to income

1.00

1.00

0.75

0.75

Fit

Fit

Panel A: Baseline model with homogeneous value

0.50

0.50

0.25

0.00

0.00

89

0.25

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Diminishing returns across formats (φ)
R2

1−

|1 − Slope|
1 + Slope

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Diminishing returns across formats (φ)
R2

1−

|1 − Slope|
1 + Slope

Notes: In each plot we depict the fit of a model-based prediction of advertising prices (y-axis) as a function of the strength of cross-format diminishing returns
(x-axis). To produce the plot, for each television owner Z and for each value φ ∈ {0, 0.1, ..., 1} of the parameter governing the strength of cross-format diminishing
returns, we calculate the predicted log(price per viewer) implied by the cross-format reach-only model defined in Section 6. For each value of φ , we then regress
the log(price per impression) of a 30-second spot observed in the data, as described in Section 3.1, against the log(price per viewer) predicted by the model and
depict on the y-axis the R2 of the regression and one minus the percent deviation of the slope from one. Panel A uses log(price per viewer) predicted from the
baseline model in which advertisers’ value of a first impression is homogeneous across viewers. Panel B uses log(price per viewer) predicted from the model in
which advertisers’ value of a first impression is proportional to a viewer’s income. The unit of analysis for the regression is an owner Z, and all variables in the
regression are residualized with respect to the share of the owner’s impressions that are to adults.

Appendix Table 1: Restrictiveness and Completeness of Quantitative Economic Model

Panel A: Restrictiveness
Economic model:
Homogeneous values Value proportional to income
(1)
(2)
MSE of log(simulated price per impression) w.r.t.

90

....constant model
....economic model
Restrictiveness of economic model

0.6650
0.7190
1.0800

0.6650
0.8200
1.2330

Number of owners
Number of viewers

33
21506

33
21506

Notes: The table evaluates the restrictiveness (Fudenberg, Gao, and Liang 2023) and completeness (Fudenberg et al. 2022) of the quantitative model
of log(price per viewer) described in Section 5. Column (1) uses log(price per viewer) predicted from the baseline model in which advertisers’ value
of a first impression is homogeneous across viewers. Column (2) uses log(price per viewer) predicted from the model in which advertisers’ value
of a first impression is proportional to a viewer’s income. The constant model predicts log(price per impression) with its mean across owners. In
calculating the mean squared error, we represent both the observed and predicted values in terms of deviation from the mean across owners.
To evaluate restrictiveness (Panel A), in each of 10,000 replicates, we randomly draw values of each owner’s log(price per impression), independently
uniform over the support of the observed log(price per impression). Restrictiveness is the ratio of the mean, across replicates, of the mean squared
error of the economic model of log(price per viewer) described in Section 5, and the mean squared error of the constant model, with respect to the
random draws.

Appendix Table 1: (continued): Restrictiveness and Completeness of Quantitative Economic Model

Panel B: Completeness
Economic model:
Homogeneous values Value proportional to income
(1)
(2)
MSE of log(observed price per impression) w.r.t.
....constant model
....owner-level regression model
....viewer-level lasso model
....economic model

0.4570
0.4360
0.4910
0.3290

0.4570
0.4240
0.4910
0.3090

....owner-level regression model
....viewer-level lasso model

6.0480
—

4.4490
—

Number of owners
Number of viewers

33
21506

33
21506

Completeness of economic model w.r.t.

91

Notes (continued): The table evaluates the restrictiveness (Fudenberg, Gao, and Liang 2023) and completeness (Fudenberg et al. 2022) of the
quantitative model of log(price per viewer) described in Section 5.
To evaluate completeness (Panel B), we consider two comparison models. In the first comparison model, we estimate
 regression of the
 a linear
∑i∈I ai ηiZ
observed log(price per impression) of each owner Z on the log value, ln (λZ ), of total impressions, the log value, ln ∑ ai , of total weighted
i∈I


∑ ai ∏ 0 (1−η 0 )
impressions, and the log value, ln i∈I ∑Z 6=Zai iZ , of the weighted fraction of viewers not seeing an ad on other owners’ networks.
i∈I

In the second comparison model, for each viewer i, we estimate a linear regression of the observed log(price per impression) of each owner Z on
the log value, ln (ηiZ ), of the viewer’s probability of seeing an ad on that owner’s networks, as well as the log values, ln 1 − ηi(Z) , of the viewer’s
probability of not seeing an ad on each of the other owners’ networks, indexed in descending order. When a value inside a logarithm is zero we
replace it with its minimum across all owners Z for the given viewer i, and we include indicators for imputed values in the regression. We estimate
the model via lasso using 10-fold cross-validation to choose the penalty, and for each viewer i we hold out one randomly chosen target owner whose
data is excluded from the estimation sample and for which we predict the log(price per impression) from the final lasso fit. In the 1.9 percent of cases
where there is insufficient variation in the regressors to estimate the model, we use the mean of the dependent variable as the lasso fit. For each owner
Z, we take the weighted mean predicted log(price per impression) across all viewers i for which the given owner is the target, and treat this mean as
the lasso-predicted log(price per impression) for the given owner. When comparing to the model with homogeneous values we use uniform weights;
when comparing to the model with value proportional to household income we use household income as the weight.
Completeness is the ratio of the improvement in mean squared error between the economic model of log(price per viewer) described in Section 5
and the comparison model, each evaluated relative to the constant model. We treat completeness as undefined when a given model has higher mean
squared error than the constant model.

