TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION, RESOURCE ALLOCATION, AND GROWTH
Author(s): Leonid Kogan, Dimitris Papanikolaou, Amit Seru and Noah Stoffman
Source: The Quarterly Journal of Economics , May 2017, Vol. 132, No. 2 (May 2017), pp.
665-712
Published by: Oxford University Press
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.2307/26495147
REFERENCES
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.2307/26495147?seq=1&cid=pdfreference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms

Oxford University Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The
Quarterly Journal of Economics

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION, RESOURCE
ALLOCATION, AND GROWTH*
LEONID KOGAN
DIMITRIS PAPANIKOLAOU
AMIT SERU
NOAH STOFFMAN
We propose a new measure of the economic importance of each innovation.
Our measure uses newly collected data on patents issued to U.S. firms in the 1926
to 2010 period, combined with the stock market response to news about patents.
Our patent-level estimates of private economic value are positively related to
the scientific value of these patents, as measured by the number of citations the
patent receives in the future. Our new measure is associated with substantial
growth, reallocation, and creative destruction, consistent with the predictions of
Schumpeterian growth models. Aggregating our measure suggests that technological innovation accounts for significant medium-run fluctuations in aggregate
economic growth and TFP. Our measure contains additional information relative
to citation-weighted patent counts; the relation between our measure and firm
growth is considerably stronger. Importantly, the degree of creative destruction
that is associated with our measure is higher than previous estimates, confirming
that it is a useful proxy for the private valuation of patents. JEL Codes: G14, E32,
O3, O4.

I. INTRODUCTION
Since Schumpeter, economists have argued that technological
innovation is a key driver of economic growth. Models of endogenous growth have rich testable predictions about both aggregate
quantities and the cross-section of firms, linking improvements
in the technology frontier to resource reallocation and subsequent
∗ We thank Hal Varian for helping us in extracting information on Patents
from Google Patents database. We are grateful to Andrew Atkeson, Nick Bloom,
Andrea Eisfeldt, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Roel Griep, Pete Klenow, Danielle Li,
Jonathan Parker, Tomasz Piskorski, and Heidi Williams for detailed comments.
We also thank numerous other discussants and participants at the AEAs, Boston
University, Columbia Business School, Duke/UNC Asset Pricing Conference, FRB
Chicago, NBER Asset Pricing, NBER Economic Fluctuations and Growth, NBER
Entrepreneurship, NBER Productivity, Minnesota, Northwestern, NYU, and SITE
for helpful discussions. We are grateful to Tom Nicholas for sharing his patent citations data. We thank the Fama-Miller Center at University of Chicago, the Zell
Center and the Jerome Kenney Fund for financial assistance.


C The Author(s) 2017. Published by Oxford University Press, on behalf of President

and Fellows of Harvard College. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com
The Quarterly Journal of Economics (2017), 665–712. doi:10.1093/qje/qjw040.
Advance Access publication on March 21, 2017.

665
This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

666

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

economic growth. However, the predictions of these models are
difficult to test directly, mainly because of the scarcity of directly
observable measures of technological innovation. To assess the
importance of technological innovation for economic growth, an
ideal measure should capture the economic value of new inventions and be comparable both across industries and across time.
This article aims to fill this gap by constructing a new measure of
the economic importance of each innovation.
We propose a new measure of the private, economic value of
new innovations that is based on stock market reactions to patent
grants. We construct this measure combining a novel data set of
patent grants over the period 1926 to 2010 with stock market
data.1 The advantage of using financial data is that asset prices
are forward-looking and hence provide us with an estimate of
the private value to the patent holder that is based on ex ante
information. This private value need not coincide with the scientific value of the patent—typically assessed using forward patent
citations. For instance, a patent may represent only a minor scientific advance, yet be very effective in restricting competition,
and thus generate large private rents. These ex ante private values are useful in studying firm allocation decisions, estimating
the (private) return to R&D spending, and assessing the degree of
creative destruction and reallocation that results following waves
of technological progress. Further, the fact that our measure of
quality is in terms of dollars implies that our estimates are comparable across time and across different industries; in contrast,
since patenting propensities could vary, comparing patent counts
across industries and time becomes more challenging.
We construct an estimate of the private value of the patent
by exploiting movements in stock prices following the days that
patents are issued to the firm. We first document that trading
activity in the stock of the firm that issued a patent increases
after the patent issuance date. Second, we find that returns on
patent grant days are more volatile than on days without any
patent grant announcement, suggesting that valuable information is released to the market. However, even within a narrow
window around grant days, stock prices may move for reasons
1. Several new studies exploit the same source of patent data (Google Patents)
as we do in our article. For instance, see Moser and Voena (2012), Moser, Voena,
and Waldinger (2012), and Lampe and Moser (2014). Ours is the first to exploit
this data at a large scale and match them to firms with stock price data.

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION

667

that are unrelated to patent values. To filter the component of
firm return that is related to the value of the patent from noise,
we make several distributional assumptions. Several robustness
checks suggest that our estimates are not overly sensitive to the
particular choice of underlying distributions. The resulting distribution of the estimated patent values is fat-tailed, consistent
with past research describing the nature of radical innovations
(Harhoff, Scherer, and Vopel 1997). The characteristics of innovating firms and industries are similar to those discussed in Baumol
(2002), Griliches (1990), and Scherer (1965, 1983) who describe
firms that have conducted radical innovation and have been responsible for technical change in the United States.
To illustrate the usefulness of our measure, we use it to examine three important questions in the literature on innovation
and growth. Addressing these issues using existing measures has
proved to be a challenge. First, the relation between the private
and the scientific value of innovation—as measured by patent
citations—has been the subject of considerable debate.2 We examine the relation between our measure and the number of citations that the patent receives in the future. We find that our
patent-level estimates of economic value are strongly positively
related to forward citations; this correlation is robust to a number of patent- and firm-level controls. Placebo experiments confirm that this relation is unlikely to be spurious. In terms of economic magnitudes, our results are comparable to Hall, Jaffe, and
Trajtenberg (2005); an additional patent citation is associated
with an increase of 0.1% to 3.2% in the economic value of a patent.
Second, we use our estimate of the market value of innovation to examine the predictions of models of endogenous growth
(e.g., Romer 1990; Grossman and Helpman 1991; Aghion and
Howitt 1992; Klette and Kortum 2004). Since the value of a firm’s
2. For instance, Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg (2005) and Nicholas (2008) document that firms owning highly cited patents have higher stock market valuations.
Harhoff et al. (1999) and Moser, Ohmstedt, and Rhode (2011) provide estimates
of a positive relation using smaller samples that contain estimates of economic
value. By contrast, Abrams, Akcigit, and Popadak (2013) use a proprietary data
set that includes estimates of patent values based on licensing fees and show that
the relation between private values and patent citations is nonmonotonic. Our approach allows us to revisit this question at a higher level of granularity than Hall,
Jaffe, and Trajtenberg (2005), while using a broader sample than Harhoff et al.
(1999), Moser, Ohmstedt, and Rhode (2011), and Abrams, Akcigit, and Popadak
(2013).

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

668

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

innovative output is hard to observe, constructing direct empirical tests of these models has proven challenging; existing approaches rely on indirect inference (see, e.g., Garcia-Macia, Hsieh,
and Klenow 2015). A unifying prediction of Schumpeterian models of growth is that firms grow through successful innovation—
either through acquiring new products or by improving existing
varieties. By contrast, innovation by competing firms has a negative effect—either directly through business stealing or indirectly
through movements in factor prices. The strength of these effects
depends on the economic value of the new inventions. Our results
using several measures of firm size—the nominal value of output, profits, capital, and number of employees—suggest that both
channels are important. Firms that experience a one standard
deviation increase in their innovation output experience higher
growth of 2.5% to 4.6% over a period of five years. Conversely,
firms that fail to innovate in an industry that experiences a one
standard deviation increase in its innovative output experience
lower growth of 2.7% to 5.1% over the same horizon. In addition to
firm growth, we find similar effects on revenue-based total factor
productivity (TFPR). Firms that innovate experience productivity
increases, whereas those that fall behind see productivity declines.
By revealing a strong relation between innovation, firm growth,
and the reallocation of resources across firms—capital and labor
flow to innovating firms and away from their competitors—these
findings support the Schumpeterian view of growth and creative
destruction.
Third, we assess the role of technological innovation in
accounting for medium-run fluctuations in aggregate economic
growth and TFP. A notable challenge facing real business cycle
models is the scarcity of evidence linking movements in TFP to
clearly identifiable measures of technological change. At the aggregate level, whether technological innovation is socially valuable in endogenous growth models depends on the degree to which
it contributes to aggregate productivity—as opposed to simply being a force for reallocation and creative destruction. Our firm-level
results, when aggregated using all the firms in our sample, are
strongly suggestive of a net positive effect of innovation. However, these effects are confined to the sample of public firms that
we study. To study the relation between innovation and growth
more broadly at the economy level, we construct an aggregate
index of innovation based on our estimated patent values. This
index is motivated by a simple growth model, in which, under

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION

669

certain assumptions, firm monopoly profits from innovation are
approximately linearly related to aggregate improvements in output and TFP. Our index captures known periods of high technological progress, namely, the 1920s, the 1960s, and the 1990s (Field
2003; Alexopoulos and Cohen 2009, 2011; Alexopoulos 2011). This
innovation index is strongly related to aggregate growth in output
and TFP. In particular, a one standard deviation increase in our
index is associated with a 1.6% to 6.5% increase in output and
a 0.6% to 3.5% increase in measured TFP over a horizon of five
years, depending on the specification.
Our measure speaks to the literature that has spent considerable effort in estimating the value of innovative output. The
most popular approach consists of using citation-weighted patent
counts (Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg 2005). We find that our innovation measure contains considerable information about firm
growth in addition to what is contained in patent citations. In particular, we repeat our firm-level analysis replacing our measure
with citation-weighted patent counts—both for the firm and for its
competitors. When doing so, we find a comparable—though somewhat weaker—relation between the firm’s own innovation output
and future growth. However, we find no similar negative link between the firm’s future growth and the citation-weighted patenting output of its competitors. We find similar results when we
include both our estimated patent values and citation-weighted
patent counts in the same specification. These findings are consistent with the view that relative to the patent’s forward citations,
our estimated value of a patent is a better estimate of its private
economic value.
Our work is related to the literature in macroeconomics that
aims to measure technological progress. Broadly, there are three
main approaches to identifying technology shocks. The first two
approaches measure technology shocks indirectly. One approach
is to measure technological change—either at the aggregate or
at the firm level—through TFP (see, e.g., Olley and Pakes 1996;
Basu, Fernald, and Kimball 2006). However, since these TFP measures are based on residuals, they could incorporate other forces
not directly related to technology, such as resource misallocation
(see, e.g., Hsieh and Klenow 2009). In the second approach, researchers have imposed model-based restrictions to identify technology shocks either through vector autoregressions (VARs) or
through estimation of structural models (see, e.g., Gali 1999;
Smets and Wouters 2003). The resulting technology series are

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

670

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

highly dependent on specific identification assumptions. Our article falls into the third category, which constructs direct measures
of technological innovation using micro data (Shea 1999; Alexopoulos 2011).3
We are not the first to link firm patenting activity to stock
market valuations (see Pakes 1985; Austin 1993; Hall, Jaffe, and
Trajtenberg 2005; Nicholas 2008). In particular, Pakes (1985) examines the relation between patents and the stock market rate
of return in a sample of 120 firms during the 1968–1975 period.
His estimates imply that on average, an unexpected arrival of one
patent is associated with an increase in the firm’s market value of
$810,000. The ultimate objective of these papers is to measure the
economic value of patents; in contrast, we use the stock market
reaction as a means to an end—to construct appropriate weights
for an innovation measure which we can use to study different
issues in the literature on innovation and growth.
Our article contributes to the literature that studies the determinants of firm growth rates. Early studies show considerable dispersion in firm growth that is weakly related to size (see
Simon and Bonini 1958). Our article is related to the growing
body of work that explores the link between innovation and firm
growth dynamics (Caballero and Jaffe 1993; Klette and Kortum
2004; Lentz and Mortensen 2008; Acemoglu et al. 2011;
Garcia-Macia, Hsieh, and Klenow 2015). Existing approaches rely
on calibration or estimation of structural models. In contrast,
3. Shea (1999) constructs direct measures of technology innovation using
patents and R&D spending and finds a weak relationship between TFP and technology shocks. Our contrasting results suggest that this weak link is likely the
result of the implicit assumption in Shea (1999) that all patents are of equal
value. Indeed, Kortum and Lerner (1998) show that there is wide heterogeneity in
the economic value of patents. Furthermore, fluctuations in the number of patents
granted are often the result of changes in patent regulation, or the quantity of
resources available to the U.S. patent office (see Griliches 1990; Hall and Ziedonis
2001). As a result, a larger number of patents does not necessarily imply greater
technological innovation. Using R&D spending to measure innovation overcomes
some of these issues, but doing so measures innovation indirectly. The link between inputs and output may vary as the efficiency of the research sector varies
over time or due to other economic forces (see, e.g., Kortum 1993). The measure
proposed by Alexopoulos (2011) based on books published in the field of technology
overcomes many of these shortcomings. However, this measure is only available at
the aggregate level and may not directly capture the economic value of innovation
to the firm. In contrast, our measure is available at the firm level, which allows us
to evaluate reallocation and growth dynamics across firms and sectors.

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION

671

our approach consists of building a direct measure of technological innovation implied by our model and using that measure to
test the model’s predictions directly. Our article is also related
to work that examines whether technological innovation leads
to positive knowledge spillovers or business stealing. Related to
this study is the work of Bloom, Schankerman, and Van Reenen
(2013), who disentangle the externalities generated by R&D expenditures on firms competing in the product and technology
space. We contribute to this literature by proposing a measure
of patent quality based on asset prices and assessing reallocation and growth dynamics after bursts of innovative activity. Finally, this work is also related to the productivity literature that
has documented substantial dispersion in measured productivity across plants and firms (see Syverson 2004). We contribute
to this literature by constructing a direct measure of technological innovation and showing that it can account for a significant fraction of cross-firm dispersion in measured TFP in our
sample.
II. CONSTRUCTION OF THE INNOVATION MEASURE
Our main objective in this section is to obtain an empirical estimate of the economic value of the patent, defined as
the present value of the monopoly rents associated with that
patent. To estimate this value, we combine information from
patent data and firm stock price movements. We proceed in two
steps.
The first empirical challenge is to isolate the information
about the value of the patent contained in stock prices from unrelated news. To do so, we focus on a narrow window following
the date when the market learns that the patent application is
successful. The U.S. Patent Office (USPTO) has consistently publicized successful patent applications throughout our sample. Focusing on the days around this event allows us to isolate a discrete
change in the information set of the market participants regarding a given patent. However, even during a small window around
the event, stock prices are likely to be contaminated with other
sources of news unrelated to the value of the patent. Therefore,
our second step filters the stock price reaction to the patent issuance from the total stock return over the event window. Next
we discuss the data used in constructing our measure and describe
these two steps in more detail.

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

672

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

II.A. Description of Patent Data
We begin by first providing a brief description of the patent
data; we relegate the details to the Online Appendix. We download
the entire history of U.S. patent documents (7.8 million patents)
from Google Patents using an automation script.4 First, we clean
assignee names by comparing each assignee name to the more
common names, and if a given name is close, according to the Levenshtein distance, to a much more common name, we substitute
the common name for the uncommon name. Having an assignee
name for each patent, we match all patents in the Google data
to corporations whose returns are in the CRSP database. Some
of these patents appear in the NBER data set and therefore are
already matched to CRSP firms. Remaining assignee names are
matched to CRSP firm names using a name matching algorithm.
Visual inspection of the matched names confirms very few mistakes in the matching. We extract patent citations from the Google
data and complement them with the hand-collected reference data
of Nicholas (2008).5
Out of the 6.2 million patents granted in or after 1926, we find
the presence of an assignee in 4,374,524 patents. After matching
the names of the assignees to public firms in CRSP, we obtain
a database of 1,928,123 matched patents. Out of these patents,
523,301 (27%) are not included in the NBER data. Overall, our
data provide a matched permco for 44.1% of all patents with an
4. Google also makes available for downloading bulk patent data files from
the USPTO. The bulk data does not have all of the additional meta information
including classification codes and citation information that Google includes in the
individual patent files. Moreover, the quality of the text generated from optical
character recognition (OCR) procedures implemented by Google is better in the
individual files than in the bulk files provided by the USPTO. This is crucial for
identifying patent assignees.
5. For the Google data, we extract patent citations from two sources. First,
all citations for patents granted between 1976 and 2011 are contained in text
files available for bulk downloading from Google. These citations are simple to
extract and likely to be free of errors, as they are official USPTO data. Second,
for patents granted before 1976, we extract citations from the OCR text generated
from the patent files. We search the text of each patent for any six- or seven-digit
numbers, which could be patent numbers. We then check if these potential patent
numbers are followed closely by the corresponding grant date for that patent; if
the correct date appears, then we can be certain that we have identified a patent
citation. Since we require the date to appear near any potential patent number, it
is unlikely that we would incorrectly record a patent citation—it is far more likely
that we would fail to record a citation than record one that isn’t there.

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION

673

assignee and 31% of all granted patents. By comparison, the
NBER patent project provides a match for 32% of all patents
from 1976 to 2006, so our matching technique is comparable, even
though we use only data extracted from OCR documents for the
period before the NBER data. Last, another point of comparison
is Nicholas (2008), who uses hand-collected patent data covering
1910 to 1939. From 1926 to 1929, he matches 9,707 patents, while
our database includes 8,858 patents; from 1930 to 1939 he has
32,778 patents while our database includes 47,036 matches during this period. After restricting the sample of patents to those
with a unique assignee, those issued while the firm has nonmissing market capitalization in CRSP, and for which we can compute
return volatilities, we obtain a final sample of 1,801,879 patents.
II.B. Identifying Information Events
The first step in constructing our measure is to isolate the release of information to the market. The USPTO issues patents on
Tuesdays, unless there is a federal holiday. The USPTO’s publication, Official Gazette, also published every Tuesday, lists patents
that are issued that day along with the details of the patent. Identifying additional information events prior to the patent issue day
is difficult, since before 2000, patent application filings were not
officially publicized (see, e.g., Austin 1993). However, anecdotal
evidence suggests that the market often had advance knowledge
of which patent applications were filed, since firms often choose
to publicize new products and the associated patent applications
themselves. For now, we assume that the market value of the
patent, denoted by ξ , is perfectly observable to market participants before the patent is granted. We show how relaxing this
assumption affects our measure in Section II.D.
On the patent issue date, the market learns that the patent
application has been successful. Absent any other news, the firm’s
stock market reaction V on the day the patent j is granted would
be given by
(1)

V j = (1 − π j ) ξ j ,

where π j is the market’s ex ante probability assessment that the
patent application is successful and ξ j is the dollar value of patent
j. The market’s reaction to the patent grant equation (1) understates the total impact of the patent on the firm value, since the
information about the probability that a patent will be granted is

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

674

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

known to the market before the uncertainty about patent application is resolved.6
Next we need to choose the length of the announcement window around the patent issuance event. To guide our decision, we
examine the pattern of trading volume on the stocks of firms that
have been issued a patent. We focus on the ratio of daily volume
to shares outstanding. We compute the abnormal share turnover
around patent issuance days, after adjusting for firm-year and
calendar day effects. As we see in Figure I, there is a moderate
and statistically significant increase in share turnover around the
day that the firm is granted a patent—with most of the increase
taking place on the first two days following the announcement.7
In particular, we find that the total abnormal turnover in the first
two days after the announcement increases by 0.2%. This is a
significant increase when compared to the median daily turnover
rate of 1.3%. Even though prices can adjust to new information
absent any trading, the fact that stock turnover increases following a patent grant is consistent with the view that patent issuance
conveys important information to the market.
In sum, we conclude that two days after the patent issuance
seems a reasonable window over which information about a successful patent grant is reflected in the stock market. We thus
choose a three-day announcement window, [t, t + 2], for the
remainder of our analysis when constructing our measure. As
robustness, we also extend the window to five days and obtain
quantitatively similar results.
6. In addition to the patent issuance date, we examined stock price responses
around other event dates, specifically, application filing and publication dates. We
find no significant stock price movements around application filing dates, consistent with the fact that the USPTO does not publish applications at the time they
are filed. After 2000, the USPTO started publishing applications 18 months after
the filing date. We find some weak stock price movements around application publication dates. Since publication-day announcements only occur in the post-2000
period, we do not include the information from these dates because we did not
want the statistical properties of the measures to be different across periods.
7. Our estimates imply that trading volume is temporarily lower prior to
the patent issuance announcement. A potential explanation is the presence of
increased information asymmetry, with investors worrying about trading against
potentially informed insiders who might know more about an impending patent issuance. Similar patterns in trading volume have been documented before earnings
announcements, see Lamont and Frazzini (2007).

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION

675

FIGURE I
Share Turnover during Patent Issuance Weeks
Figure plots the share turnover around patent issuance days. Share turnover h
is the ratio of daily volume (CRSP: vol) to shares outstanding (CRSP: shrout). The
median daily share turnover is 1.29%. We report the coefficient estimates bl , l =
−1. . . 3, (and 90% confidence intervals) from the following specification:
h f d = a0 +



bl I f d+l + c Z f d + ε f d ,

l

where the indicator variable I takes the value one if firm f is issued a patent on
day d; the vector of controls Zfd includes firm-year and calendar day fixed effects.
Standard errors are clustered by year.

II.C. Some Illustrative Examples
Before turning to our main analysis, we examine some illustrative case studies to study the relation between the stock market reaction and important patent grants. For these examples we
performed an extensive search of online and print news sources
to confirm that no other news events are likely to account for the
return around the patent dates.
The first example is patent 4,946,778, titled “Single Polypeptide Chain Binding Molecules,” which was granted to Genex Corporation on August 7, 1990. The firm’s stock price increased by
67% (in excess of market returns) in the three days following
the patent announcement. Investors clearly believed the patent
was valuable, and news of the patent was reported in the media.
For example, on August 8 Business Wire quoted the biotechnology head of a Washington-based patent law firm as saying, “The
claims issued to Genex will dominate the whole industry. Companies wishing to make, use or sell genetically engineered SCA

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

676

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

proteins will have to negotiate with Genex for the rights to do
so.” The patent has subsequently proved to be important on other
dimensions as well. The research that developed the patent, Bird
et al. (1988), was published in Science and has since been cited
over 1,300 times in Google Scholar, while the patent itself has
been subsequently cited by 775 patents. Genex was acquired in
1991 by another biotechnology firm, Enzon. News reports at the
time indicate that the acquisition was made in particular to give
Enzon access to Genex’s protein technology. Another example from
the biotechnology industry is patent 5,585,089, granted to Protein
Design Labs on December 17, 1996. The stock rose by 22% in the
next two days on especially high trading volume. On December
20, the New York Times reported that the patent “could affect as
much as a fourth of all biotechnology drugs currently in clinical
trials.”
As another illustration, consider the case of patent 6,317,722
granted to Amazon.com on November 13, 2001, for the “use of
electronic shopping carts to generate personal recommendations.”
When Amazon filed this patent in September 1998, online commerce was in its infancy. Amazon alone has grown from a market capitalization of approximately $6 billion to over $100 billion today. The importance of a patent that staked out a claim
on a key part of encouraging consumers to buy more—the nowpervasive “customers also bought” suggestions—was not missed
by investors: the stock appreciated by 34% in the two days after
the announcement, adding $900 million in market capitalization.
Our methodology is potentially helpful in distinguishing between innovations that are scientifically important and those that
have a large impact on firm profits. For example, consider patent
6,329,919 granted to IBM in 2001 for a “system and method for
providing reservations for restroom use.” This patent describes a
system to allow passengers on an airplane to reserve a spot in the
bathroom queue. The patent has subsequently been of such little
value to IBM that the firm has stopped paying the annual renewal
fee to the USPTO, and the patent has now lapsed. Our method
would identify this patent as having little economic value—the return over the three-day window is slightly negative, and there is
no change in the trading volume. By contrast, citation counts indicate that this patent presented a considerable scientific advance—
the patent has received 21 citations, which places it in the top 20%
of the patents granted in the same year.

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION

677

II.D. Estimating the Value of a Patent
The second step in constructing our measure is to isolate the
component of firm return around patent issuance events that is
related to the value of the patent. In particular, the stock price
of innovating firms may fluctuate during the announcement window around patent issuance for reasons unrelated to innovation.
Hence, it is important to account for measurement error in stock
returns.
To remove market movements, we focus on the firm’s idiosyncratic return defined as the firm’s return minus the return on the
market portfolio.8 We decompose the idiosyncratic stock return R
for a given firm around the time that its patent j is issued as
(2)

Rj = v j + ε j ,

where v j denotes the value of patent j—as a fraction of the firm’s
market capitalization—and εj denotes the component of the firm’s
stock return that is unrelated to the patent.
We construct our estimate ξ of the economic value of patent j
as the product of the estimate of the stock return due to the value
of the patent times the market capitalization M of the firm that is
issued patent j on the day prior to the announcement of the patent
issuance:
(3)

ξ j = (1 − π̄ )−1

1
E[v j |R j ] M j .
Nj

If multiple patents Nj are issued to the same firm on the same day
as patent j, we assign each patent a fraction N1j of the total value.
Since the unconditional probability π̄ of a successful patent application is approximately 56% in the 1991–2001 period (see Carley,
Hegde, and Marco 2015), we account for this understatement by
1
= 2.27.9
multiplying our estimates of patent values by 0.44
8. By using this “market-adjusted-return model” (Campbell, Lo, and MacKinlay 1997), we avoid the need to estimate the firm’s stock market beta, therefore
removing one source of measurement error. As a robustness check, we construct
the idiosyncratic return as the firm’s stock return minus the return on the betamatched portfolio (CRSP: bxret). This has the advantage that it relaxes the assumption that all firms have the same amount of systematic risk, but is only
available for a smaller sample of firms. Our results are quantitatively similar
when using this alternative definition.
9. In principle, the ex ante probability of a successful patent grant π j
could vary with the private value of a patent ξ . This possibility will induce

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

678

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

To implement equation (3), we need to make assumptions
about the distributions of v and ε. We allow both distributions
to vary across firms f and across time t. Since the market value
of the patent v is a positive random variable, we assume that
v is distributed according to a normal distribution truncated at
0, v j ∼ N + (0, σv2f t ).10 Further, we assume that the noise term is
normally distributed, ε j ∼ N (0, σε2f t ). Given our assumptions, the
filtered value of v j as a function of the idiosyncratic stock return
R is equal to
 

Rj
φ
−
δ
f t σε f t

 
,
(4)
E[v j |R j ] = δ f t R j + δ f t σε f t
R
1−
− δ f t σε fjt
where φ and are the standard normal pdf and cdf, respectively,
and δ is the signal-to-noise ratio,
(5)

δ ft =

σv2f t
σv2f t + σε2f t

.

The conditional expectation in equation (4) is an increasing and
convex function of the idiosyncratic firm return R. The exact shape
of this function depends on the distributional assumptions for v
and ε.11
measurement error in the estimated patent values. Aggregating patent values
within a firm (or year) will partly ameliorate this concern, as long as the joint distribution of π and ξ is stable within firm-years. However, this need not be the case.
Carley, Hegde, and Marco (2015) use proprietary data from USPTO and document
that the point estimates of the acceptance rates varied between 50% and 60% in
the 1991–2001 period. This possibility implies that our firm and aggregate level
innovation measures should be interpreted with caution. Obtaining an estimate
of the ex ante probability π at the firm-year level over the horizon of our sample
is challenging because data on patent applications—required to construct π —are
publicly available only post-2000. In addition, even during the post-2000 period,
these data contain unreliable information on assignee names that is required to
match the patents to firms. We return to this issue in Section IV.B.
10. We are grateful to John Cochrane for this suggestion.
11. We experimented with different distributional assumptions for v and ε.
We relegate the details to the Online Appendix. (i) We allowed for a nonzero mean
for the truncated normal; (ii) we modeled v as an exponential distribution; and
(iii) we modeled v and as following a truncated Cauchy and a standard Cauchy
distribution, respectively. The resulting estimates of patent values were quite
similar: in the first case, allowing for a nonzero mean had mostly a scaling effect
on our estimates: the correlation of filtered returns in equation (4) was in excess

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION

679

To proceed further, we need to estimate the parameters σ εft
and σ vft . If we allow both variances to arbitrarily vary across
firms and across time, the number of parameters becomes quite
large and thus infeasible to estimate. We therefore specify that
the signal-to-noise ratio is constant across firms and time, δ ft =
δ. This assumption implies that σε2f t and σv2f t are allowed to vary
across firms and time, but in constant proportions to each other.
To estimate δ, we compute the increase in the volatility of firm returns around patent announcement days. Specifically, we regress
the log squared returns on a patent issue-day dummy variable,
Ifd ,
(6)


2
log R f d = γ I f d + c Z f d + u f d,

where Rfd refers to the three-day idiosyncratic return of firm f,
starting on day d. In this estimation, we restrict the sample to
firms that have been granted at least one patent. We include controls Z for day of week and firm interacted with year fixed effects
to account for seasonal fluctuations in volatility and the fact that
firm volatility is time-varying. The signal-to-noise estimate can
γ
.
be recovered from the estimated value of γ using 
δ = 1 − e−

Our estimate 
γ = 0.0146 implies δ ≈ 0.0145, so we use this as
our benchmark value.12 The last step in estimating equation (4)
involves estimating the variance of the measurement error σε2f t .
We do so nonparametrically using the sum of squared marketadjusted returns, and we allow the estimate to vary at an annual
frequency (see Andersen and Terasvirta 2009).13
of 99%. To obtain a more meaningful difference we would have to allow for the
unconditional mean of v j to vary across firm-years. This is difficult to do because
daily data on stock returns are not very informative about the mean of the value of
the patent. In cases (ii) and (iii) the correlation between the filtered returns under
these additional distributional assumptions ranges from 84% to 89%. In an earlier
version of the article, we also approximated equation (4) with a piecewise linear
function, max (0, R); the correlation between this approximation and our filtered
returns in equation (4) was approximately equal to 48%. In the Online Appendix,
we repeat the main parts of the analysis in the paper using measures constructed
under these alternative distributional assumptions. The results are comparable,
as we can see in Online Appendix Tables A.7 and A.8.
12. We also experimented with allowing γ to vary by firm size; except for
the smallest firms, the estimates of γ were statistically similar across firm size
quintiles.
13. In particular, we first estimate the conditional volatility of firm f at year t
using the realized mean idiosyncratic squared returns, σ 2f t . This second moment is

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

680

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

Last, one important caveat is that our estimation of δ implicitly assumes that the market does not revise its beliefs about
the value of the patent at the time the patent is issued. This
assumption is valid post-2000, under the view that market has
the same expertise as the USPTO in evaluating the patent given
the same information set. Specifically, subsequent to the American Inventors Protection Act (AIPA), which came into effect on
November 30, 2000, the USPTO began publishing patent applications 18 months after the filing date, even if the patents had
not yet been granted. Hence, for these applications, the market
should have had full knowledge of the value of the patent at the
time of the patent grant. Prior to 2000, patent applications were
only disclosed to the public at the time the patents were granted
to firms. Hence, it is possible that during the period prior to 2000,
the market did not know the full value of the patent prior to the
patent being granted. If this were the case, then the increase in
stock market volatility following a patent grant likely overestimates δ, since it also includes movements in stock prices that are
related to revisions of the patent value.14
To examine the importance of this issue, we exploit the change
in information disclosure policy by the AIPA that applied to all
patents filed after November 30, 2000. For the patents that were
filed after November 30, 2000—and whose publication date occurred 18 months after the application date, but before the grant
date—the market had full knowledge of their quality at the time
these patents were granted. By contrast, for the patents filed before November 30, it is possible that on the grant day the stock
market reaction indeed contains news about the market value
of the patent, ξ . To assess if this possibility impacts our estimation, we compare estimates of the signal-to-noise ratio using
equation (6) across the two sets of patents: patents filed just before the act, that is, in the month of November 2000; and patents
filed immediately after the act, that is, in December 2000. Using
estimated over both announcement and nonannouncement days, so it is a mongrel
of both σv2f t and σε2f t . Given our estimate of σ 2f t , the fraction of trading days that
are announcement days, dft , and our estimate 
γ , we recover the variance of the

−1
measurement error through σε2f t = 3 σ 2f t 1 + 3 d f t (eγ̂ − 1) .
14. Specifically, if the market also updates its beliefs about ξ , the change in
the stock price at the grant date would be equal to V jt = (1 − π j ) ξ j + π j (ξ j − ξ̂ j ),
where ξ̂ is the prior belief about the market value of the patent. Assuming the
forecast error ξ j − ξ̂ j is uncorrelated with the value of the patent, equation (2) still
applies. However, we can no longer use equation (6) to estimate δ.

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

681

TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION
TABLE I
ESTIMATES OF PATENT VALUE: DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS

Mean
Std. dev.
Percentiles
p1
p5
p10
p25
p50
p75
p90
p95
p99

Rf
(%)

E[v|Rf ]
(%)

ξ

1.18
1.98

0.07
3.92

0.32
0.20

10.36
32.04

0
0
0
0.20
0.62
1.38
2.78
4.06
8.84

−9.93
−5.15
−3.55
−1.67
−0.09
1.62
3.82
5.73
11.49

0.11
0.14
0.16
0.20
0.27
0.37
0.53
0.68
1.07

0.01
0.04
0.11
0.73
3.22
9.09
22.09
38.20
121.39

C

C
C̄

10.26
20.13
0
0
0
1
5
11
24
38
90

Moment

Notes. The table reports the distribution of the following variables across the patents in our sample: the
number of future citations till the end of our sample period C; the number of citations scaled by the mean
number of cites to patents issued in the same year C̄; the market-adjusted firm returns Rf on the three-day
window following the patent issue date; the filtered component of returns E[v|Rf ] related to the value of
innovation using equation (4); and the filtered dollar value of innovation ξ using equation (3) deflated to
1982 (million) dollars using the CPI. Patents are always issued on Tuesdays, hence the three-day return
is computed as the cumulative market-adjusted return between Tuesday and Thursday. Market adjusted
returns are computed as the difference between the firm return (CRSP holding period return) minus the
return of the CRSP value-weighted index. We restrict attention to the patents for which we have nonmissing
data on three-day announcement return, market capitalization, and return volatilities—inputs needed to
compute our ˆ measure. The sample contains 1,801,879 patents.

stock price reactions around the grant dates of these patents we
find that the point estimate of γ is 0.03 larger for the patents filed
in December 2000 relative to the patents filed in November 2000.
However, the difference is not statistically significant (p-value is
.31). We interpret this evidence as suggesting that the information
content around the application publication date may be small, and
as a result we do not alter the estimation of the signal-to-noise
ratio δ.15
II.E. Descriptive Statistics
In Table I we report the sample distribution of ξ along with
other variables: the number of forward citations, the idiosyncratic
15. Nevertheless, we do investigate the robustness of our results to different
values of δ. As noted already, in the presence of information about the patent
quality that is also revealed on grant date, our estimate of the signal-to-noise ratio
δ underestimates the amount of noise. We thus repeat our empirical analysis using
smaller estimates of δ. Our findings are economically similar and are available on
request.

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

682

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

firm returns Rf , and filtered patent values obtained from equation (4). As is well known, the distribution of patent citations
is highly skewed, with approximately 16% of patents receiving
no citations. In addition, the distribution of firm returns Rf is
right skewed, and positive roughly 55% of the time. In addition,
the estimated value of patents—both in absolute terms ξ as well
as relative to the firm market capitalization in equation (4)—is
highly skewed.
Our procedure delivers a median value of a patent equal to
$3.2 million in 1982 dollars. Given the scarcity of data on the
value of innovations, the plausibility of this number is difficult to
assess. One point of comparison is Giuri et al. (2007) who conduct
a survey of inventors for a sample of 7,752 European patents. The
inventors were asked to estimate the minimum price at which
the owner of the patent, whether the firm, other organizations,
or the inventor, would have sold the patent rights on the day on
which the patent was granted. Giuri et al. (2007) report that about
68% of all the patents in their sample have a (minimum) value of
less than €1 million.
Given those estimates, the average level of patent values
seems a bit high. However, we should note that our estimates
are based on a sample of public firms; these firms may attach
higher valuations to individual patents compared to the inventors
in the sample of Giuri et al. (2007). In addition, the distributional
assumptions we made in equation (4) likely play a role. In particular, the mean of the distribution of v j is closely tied to the second
moment of v j .16 Further, we have scaled our estimated patent
values by the average acceptance probability π̄ in the 1991–2001
subsample. If the ex ante acceptance probability is correlated with
patent values, this will bias the estimate of the average patent
value upwards. Last, another possibility that could inflate the
estimated patent values is that a patent grant may sometimes
provide information about the likelihood of future patents being
granted.
In sum, even if the average valuation is too high, crosssectional differences in value across patents can still be meaningful. Thus, we next explore whether our measure correlates
16. For instance, allowing the mean of the distribution of v j (before truncation)
to vary from 0 resulted in somewhat smaller magnitudes for patent values (median
of 1.8 million). However, doing so has only a scaling effect on our estimate of patent
values.

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION

683

with the other commonly used measure of patent quality, forward
citations.
III. PATENT MARKET VALUES AND CITATIONS
The relation between the private and the scientific value of
innovation has been the subject of considerable debate. The innovation literature has argued that forward patent citations are
a good indicator of the quality of the innovation. Hall, Jaffe, and
Trajtenberg (2005) and Nicholas (2008) have argued that forward
citations are also correlated with the private value of patents
based on a regression of a firm’s Tobin’s Q on its stock of citationweighted patents. Harhoff et al. (1999) and Moser, Ohmstedt, and
Rhode (2011) provide estimates of a positive relation using smaller
samples that contain estimates of economic value. However, the
relation between patent citations and the private value of a patent
can be theoretically ambiguous. Abrams, Akcigit, and Popadak
(2013) cast doubt on these earlier findings by proposing a model
of defensive patenting. Using a proprietary data set that includes
estimates of patent values based on licensing revenues, they document an inverse-U relation between citations and patent values.
Armed with our measure, we reexamine the relation between
citations and the market value of innovation using the number
of citations the patent receives in the future. Our measure allows
us to study this question at a more granular level than Hall,
Jaffe, and Trajtenberg (2005), while using a broader sample than
Abrams, Akcigit, and Popadak (2013). We relate the total number
of citations C a patent j receives in the future to the estimated
value of the patent, ξ j ,
(7)



log ξ j = a + b log 1 + C j + c Z j + u j .

To control for omitted factors that may influence citations and
the measured patent valuations, we include a vector of controls
Z that includes grant-year fixed effects, because older patents
have had more time to accumulate citations; the firm’s log market capitalization log Mj (measured on the day prior to the patent
grant), as larger firms may produce more influential patents; the
firm’s log idiosyncratic volatility log σ ft , since it mechanically affects our measure while at the same time fast-growing firms have
more volatile returns and could produce higher quality patents;
technology class–year fixed effects, since citation numbers may

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

684

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
TABLE II
FORWARD CITATIONS AND PATENT MARKET VALUES

log (1 + Cj )
N
R2
Controls
Firm size
Volatility
Fixed effects

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.174
(9.99)
1,801,301
0.205

0.099
(9.43)
1,801,301
0.707

0.054
(10.28)
1,801,301
0.790

0.013
(14.05)
1,801,301
0.925

0.004
(5.23)
1,801,301
0.952

—
—
CxT

Y
—
CxT

Y
Y
CxT

Y
Y
CxT
F

Y
—
CxT
FxT

Notes. Table presents the results from estimating equation (7) relating the estimated patent value to the
forward citations to the patent. The dollar value of a patent is constructed using equation (3). For details on
our baseline empirical procedure see Section II.D. We include grant year fixed effects throughout. Depending
on the specification we also include: USPTO three-digit technology classification classes interacted with grant
year fixed effects, CxT; our estimate of the firm’s idiosyncratic volatility; firm size, measured as market
capitalization on the day prior to the patent issue date; firm fixed effects, F; firm interacted with grant
year fixed effects, FxT. We cluster the standard errors by the patent grant year, and report t-statistics in
parentheses. The sample contains 1,801,301 (out of 1,801,879) patents for which we have information on
technology class. All variables are winsorized at the 1% level using annual breakpoints.

vary across different technologies over time; and firm fixed effects to control for the presence of unobservable firm effects. Last,
we also estimate a specification with firm effects interacted with
year to account for the possibility that these unobservable firm effects may vary over time. We cluster the standard errors by grant
year to account for potential serial correlation in citations across
patents granted in a given year.
We present the results in Table II. Consistent with the findings of Harhoff et al. (1999) and Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg
(2005), we find a strong and positive association between forward
citations and market values. Figure II summarizes the univariate
relation between citations and patent market values. To plot it we
group the patent data into 100 quantiles based on their patent
citations, scaled by the mean number of citations to patents in
the same year cohort. We then plot the average number of cohortadjusted patent citations in each quantile versus the mean of the
estimated patent value in each quantile, also scaled by the mean
estimate of all patents in the same year cohort. We see that this
relation is monotonically increasing and mostly log-linear, with
the possible exception of patents with very few citations.17 This
17. As Table I shows, a quarter of patents in our sample receive either zero
or one citation in the future. The discreteness of citation counts makes it difficult

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION

685

FIGURE II
Forward Citations and Patent Market Value
Figure plots the cross-sectional relation between forward patent citations and
the estimated market value of patents. We group the patent data into 100 quantiles
based on their cohort adjusted citations (1 + C
). The horizontal axis plots the log
C̄
of average cohort adjusted patent citations in each quantile. The vertical axis plots
the log of the average patent value in each quantile (scaled by the average value
of patents granted in the same year). Patent values are constructed according to
equation (3).

pattern is somewhat at odds with the findings of Abrams, Akcigit,
and Popadak (2013), who document an inverse-U relation between
citations and value of patents. We conjecture that this discrepancy
may be due to differences in our sample relative to that used in
Abrams, Akcigit, and Popadak (2013).
The economic magnitudes implied by our estimates are comparable to those obtained by the existing literature. One additional forward citation, around the median number of citations, is
to differentiate among these patents. In contrast, our measure indicates some
variation in quality among these less-cited patents. The nonlinearity at the bottom
end of the citations distribution partly reflects this fact. Further, citations occur
with a lag, implying that this discreteness problem will be accentuated for more
recent patents.

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

686

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

associated with a 0.1% to 3.2% increase in the value of that patent,
depending on the controls included. For comparison, Hall, Jaffe,
and Trajtenberg (2005) find that relative to the median, if all the
firm’s patents were to have one additional cite, this increase would
be associated with an increase in the value of the firm by approximately 3%. A further point of comparison is Harhoff et al. (1999),
who study the relation between survey-based estimates of patent
values and citations for a sample of 962 patents. Their estimates
imply that a single citation around the median is associated with,
on average, more than $1 million of economic value. Evaluated at
the mean of the distribution of ξ j , our estimates imply that one
additional citation around the median number of citations in our
sample is associated with approximately $15,000 to $500,000 (in
1982 prices).
In sum, our innovation measure ξ is economically meaningfully related to future citations. This fact, combined with the previously documented links regarding patent citations and market
value, can be interpreted as a test of external validity for our measure. Along these lines, we performed a series of placebo experiments to illustrate that the relation between value of a particular
patent and the number of citations received by that patent in the
future is not spurious. In each placebo experiment, we randomly
generate a different issue date for each patent within the same
year the patent is granted to the firm. We repeat this exercise
500 times and then reconstruct our measure using the placebo
grant dates. In Figure III , we plot the distribution of the estimated coefficients and t-statistics corresponding to the specification in column (5) of Table II. Based on the distribution of coefficients and t-statistics across the placebo experiments, centered at
zero, relative to the effects we find in Table II, we conclude that
our results are unlikely to be spurious.
Importantly, we want to reiterate that our innovation measure ξ and forward patent citations likely measure different aspects of quality. By construction, our procedure aims to measure
the private economic value of a patent. Patent citations are more
reflective of the scientific value of the innovation. For instance,
one patent may represent only a minor scientific advance—and
thus receive few citations—but be particularly successful at restricting competition and thus generate sizable private benefits.
With that distinction in mind, we show in the next section that
our measure also contains information about future firm growth
that is distinct from that included in patent citations.

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION

687

FIGURE III
Relation between Stock Market Reaction and Number of Citations across Placebo
Experiments
Figure plots distribution of estimated coefficients b̂ (Panel A) and t-statistics
(Panel B), from estimating equation (7)—corresponding to the specification of column (5) in Table II—across 500 placebo experiments. In each placebo experiment,
we randomly generate a different issue date for each patent within the same
year the patent is granted to the firm. We then reconstruct our measure using
these placebo grant dates. The solid line on the right corresponds to the estimated
coefficient (and t-statistic) using the real data—column (5) in Table II.

IV. INNOVATION AND FIRM GROWTH
Models of endogenous growth have rich testable predictions
about the cross-section of firms, linking improvements in the technology frontier to resource reallocation and subsequent economic
growth (Romer 1990; Grossman and Helpman 1991; Aghion and
Howitt 1992; Klette and Kortum 2004). Since the value of a firm’s
innovative output is hard to observe, constructing direct empirical tests of these models has proven challenging. Here, we use our
estimate of the value of innovation to examine the predictions of
these models. We also contrast the dynamics of reallocation and
growth using our measure with the citations-based measure that
is available in the literature.
IV.A. Firm-Level Measures of Innovation
We merge our patent data with the CRSP/Compustat merged
database. We restrict the sample to firm-year observations with
nonmissing values for book assets and SIC classification codes.
We also omit firms in industries that never patent in our sample.
In addition, we omit financial firms (SIC codes 6000 to 6799) and

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

688

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

utilities (SIC codes 4900 to 4949), leaving us with 158,739 firmyear observations that include 15,787 firms in the 1950 to 2010
period. Out of these firms, only one third (5,801 firms) file at least
one patent. To minimize the impact of outliers, we winsorize all
variables at the 1% level using yearly breakpoints.
We first measure the total dollar value of innovation produced
by a given firm f in year t, based on stock market (sm), by simply
summing up all the values of patents j that were granted to that
firm,
(8)

sm
f,t =



ξj,

j∈P f,t

where Pf, t denotes the set of patents issued to firm f in year t. A
highly popular measure of the output of innovation produced by
a firm is its citation-weighted (cw) patents. We thus construct an
analogous measure using this metric,
(9)

cw
f,t =



1+

j∈P f,t

Cj
C̄ j

,

where C̄ j is the average number of forward citations received
by the patents that were granted in the same year as patent j.
This scaling is used to adjust for citation truncation lags (Hall,
Jaffe, and Trajtenberg 2005). Equations (8) and (9) are essentially
weighted patent counts; if firm f files no patents in year t, both
variables equal zero.
Large firms tend to file more patents. As a result, sm
f,t and
cw
are
strongly
increasing
in
firm
size
(see
Online
Appendix
f,t
Table A.3). In our analysis, we need to ensure that fluctuations
in size are not driving the variation in innovative output. We
therefore scale the two measures above by firm size. We use book
assets as our baseline case,
(10)

θm
f,t =

m
f,t

Bf t

,

for m ∈ {sm, cw}, where Bft is book assets of firm f in year t.
We note that our inferences in the analysis that follows are not
sensitive to using book assets for normalization because we also
control for various measures of firm size in all our specifications.

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

689

TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION
TABLE III
DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS: FIRM INNOVATION AND GROWTH
Mean Std. dev.
Innovation output,
SM-weighted (θ sm
f , %)
Innovation output, C-weighted
(θ cw
f , %)
Profits, growth rate (%)
Output, growth rate (%)
Capital stock, growth rate (%)
Employment, growth rate (%)
TFPR, log (%)

p10

p25

p50

p75

p90

3.1

12.1

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.6 7.1

3.8

12.8

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.6 9.4

5.9
5.0
9.9
3.9
−31.8

42.5
38.8
34.8
35.0
40.3

−28.9 −7.6
5.4 19.4 41.5
−24.9 −6.8
4.7 16.8 35.5
−9.0 −0.2
6.6 17.3 36.4
−20.5 −5.6
2.5 13.4 30.8
−75.2 −49.9 −30.2 −11.2 11.8

Notes. The table presents descriptive statistics for the firm’s innovative output (θ f , defined in equation
[10]) which weigh patents using their stock market reaction (SM, see equation [8]) and citations (CW, see
equation [9]). In addition, we report the growth rate in firm gross profits (COMPUSTAT: sale minus COMPUSTAT: cogs, deflated by the CPI); firm output (COMPUSTAT: sale plus change in inventories COMPUSTAT:
invt, deflated by the CPI); firm capital stock (COMPUTAT: ppegt, deflated by the NIPA price of equipment);
firm employment (COMPUSTAT: emp); and firm TFPR, constructed using the methodology of Olley and Pakes
(1996) applied on Compustat data using the procedure in Imrohoroglu and Tuzel (2014). All variables are
winsorized at the 1% level using annual breakpoints.

As we discuss later, the results using our measure are similar if
we scale by the firm’s market capitalization instead.
Table III presents summary statistics related to the two meacw
sures of innovation, θ sm
f,t and θ f,t . Innovative activity is highly
skewed across firms—as captured by both our measure and
citation-weighted patents. This is consistent with the prior literature that has noted that most firms do not patent and that there is
large dispersion in the number of citations across patents. Examining the next rows of Table III, we note that there is substantial
heterogeneity in firm growth rates of output, profits as well as capital and labor. Further, there is substantial heterogeneity in mean
innovation outcomes across industries (see Online Appendix Table A.5). The most innovative industries are drugs, automobiles,
and chemicals while the least innovative ones are food, tobacco,
and apparel/retail. These patterns match those of innovators as
described by Baumol (2002), Griliches (1990), and Scherer (1983).
In addition, there is some interesting time series variation in the
distribution of innovation outcomes across firms (see Online Appendix Table A.4). In particular, we see an increase in dispersion
of innovative output, with an increase in both the mass of firms
that do not patent, as well as an increase in the value of innovative
output at the extreme end.

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

690

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

IV.B. Firm Innovation, Growth, and Productivity
We now examine the relation between innovation and firm
growth and productivity. Endogenous growth models imply that
firm growth is related to innovation, typically measured by the
number of product varieties or the quality of goods the firm is
producing (Romer 1990; Grossman and Helpman 1991; Aghion
and Howitt 1992; Klette and Kortum 2004). In a majority of these
models, innovation by other firms has a negative impact on firm
growth, either directly through business stealing or indirectly
through changes in factor prices. We refer to the latter effect as
creative destruction.
1. Methodology. To examine creative destruction, we need
to compute a measure of innovation by competing firms. We
define the set of competing firms as all firms in the same
industry—defined at the SIC3 level—excluding firm f. We denote
this set by I\ f . We then measure innovation by competitors of
firm f as the weighted average of the innovative output of its
competitors,
(11)

i
θ I\
f,t =

f  ∈I\ f

i
f  ,t

f  ∈I\ f B f  t

.

We compute equation (11) for the market-based measure (sm) as
well as for citation-weighted patent counts (cw).
We assess the relation between the innovative activity of the
firm and its competitors and its future growth and productivity. In
particular, as dependent variables, X, we iteratively use (a) profits,
(b) nominal value of output, (c) capital stock, (d) number of employees, and (e) revenue-based productivity (TFPR). We estimate
the following specification.
(12)

log X f,t+τ − log X f,t = aτ θ f,t + bτ θ I\ f,t + c Z f t + u f t+τ .

We explore horizons τ of one to five years. In addition to Xft , the
vector Z includes the log value of the capital stock and the log
number of employees to alleviate our concern that firm size may
introduce some mechanical correlation between the dependent
variable and our innovation measure. For instance, large firms
tend to innovate more, yet have been shown to grow slower (see
Evans 1987). Controlling for other measures of size (i.e., book
assets) yields similar results. We control for firm idiosyncratic

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

691

TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION
TABLE IV
INNOVATION AND FIRM GROWTH
Firm (Horizon)
1

2

3

4

Competitors (Horizon)
5

1

2

3

4

5

Panel A: Profits
0.018 0.029 0.036 0.042 0.046
[3.54] [4.43] [3.69] [3.76] [3.55]

−0.016 −0.030 −0.032 −0.035 −0.038
[−3.00] [−5.09] [−7.28] [−6.01] [−5.85]

Panel B: Output
0.009 0.015 0.021 0.026 0.032
[3.10] [3.39] [3.15] [2.91] [3.39]

−0.015 −0.032 −0.041 −0.046 −0.051
[−3.58] [−7.47] [−8.97] [−8.23] [−7.81]

Panel C: Capital
0.010 0.020 0.028 0.033 0.038
[8.24] [6.89] [6.07] [4.66] [4.33]

0.000 −0.009 −0.019 −0.028 −0.038
[−0.07] [−1.63] [−2.53] [−3.37] [−4.45]

Panel D: Labor
0.007 0.013 0.019 0.023 0.025
[5.28] [4.51] [4.24] [3.86] [3.38]

−0.008 −0.019 −0.024 −0.026 −0.027
[−2.00] [−4.81] [−5.32] [−4.96] [−4.56]

Panel E: TFPR
0.013 0.017 0.019 0.023 0.024
[2.34] [2.29] [2.78] [3.50] [4.31]

−0.002 −0.006 −0.010 −0.015 −0.017
[−1.23] [−2.64] [−3.55] [−4.77] [−4.35]

Notes. Table reports point estimates of equation (12) for firm profits, output, capital, employment, and
TFPR. See notes to Table III for variable definitions. We relate firm growth and productivity to innovation by
the firm (θ SM
f , defined in equation [10]; see also equation [8]) and the innovation by the firm’s competitors
SM , the average innovation of other firms in the same SIC3 industry, see equation [11]). Controls include one
(θ I\
f
lag of the dependent variable, log values of firm capital, employment, and the firm’s idiosyncratic volatility, and
industry (I) and time (T) fixed effects. All variables are winsorized at the 1% level using annual breakpoints.
Standard errors are clustered by firm and year, t-statistics are reported in parentheses. All right-hand-side
variables are scaled to unit standard deviation.

volatility σ ft because it may have a mechanical effect on our innovation measure and is likely correlated with firms’ future growth
opportunities (Myers and Majluf 1984). Last, we include industry and time dummies to account for unobservable factors at the
industry and year level. We cluster standard errors by both firm
and year. To facilitate the comparison between our measure and
patent citations, we normalize both variables to unit standard
deviation.
2. Estimation Results. We focus on the estimates of a and
b, which capture the direct impact of firm innovation on growth
and the degree of creative destruction, respectively. Panels A–D of
Table IV examine firm growth, as measured by the growth rate of
(a) profits, (b) nominal output, (c) capital, and (d) number of employees. Consistent with models of innovation, we see that future

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

692

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

firm growth is strongly related to the firm’s own innovative output.
The magnitudes are substantial; over a five-year horizon, a one
standard deviation increase in a firm’s innovation is associated
with a 4.6% increase in profits, a 3.2% increase in output, a 3.8%
increase in capital investment, and a 2.5% increase in
employment.
Our estimates of b suggest that innovation is associated with
a substantial degree of creative destruction. In particular, a one
standard deviation increase in innovation by a firm’s competitors
is associated with a decline of 3.8% in profits, 5.1% in output,
3.8% in capital investment, and 2.7% in employment, over the
same five-year horizon. Relative to existing studies that study externalities associated with firm innovation (e.g., Bernstein and
Nadiri 1989; Bloom, Schankerman, and Van Reenen 2013) our
estimates imply a substantially higher degree of creative destruction. We conjecture that this difference is likely due to the fact that
θ sm —by construction—measures the private value of innovation,
as opposed to its social value, which may include research-related
externalities. We revisit this issue below when we compare our
results to those using citation-weighted patent counts.
Panel E of Table IV examines the relation between innovation
and (revenue-based) firm productivity. We see that a one standard
deviation increase in a firm’s innovation is associated with a 2.4%
increase in a firm’s revenue-based productivity. Conversely, a one
standard deviation increase in innovation by a firm’s competitors is followed by a 1.7% drop in productivity over five years. The
negative effect of competitor innovation on revenue-based productivity is most likely due to its negative effect on firm-level prices,
possibly due to business-stealing effects.18
Overall, our measure of innovation activity is related to firm
growth and productivity, providing direct support for models of
endogenous growth. In addition, these results contribute to the
discussion on the determinants of growth rates and productivity differences across firms. Understanding why these differences
exist and persist over time and relating them to specific aspects
18. For instance, if the firm is producing a portfolio of patented and nonpatented goods, and having a patent allows the firm to act as a monopolist and
charge a higher markup, the loss of a good to a rival firm could imply that the
firm’s average markup—across all goods it produces—falls. In this case, we would
see a drop in TFPR.

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION

693

of firms’ economic activity remains a significant challenge.19 A
direct measure of the firm’s innovative output allows us to quantify the strength of this relation. In this respect, our approach is
similar to Bloom and Van Reenen (2007) who document that differences in their measure of management quality across firms
account for a significant fraction of dispersion in TFP across
firms.20
3. Comparison to Citation-Based Measures. We next compare the results above to those obtained using a more
traditional measure of innovative output, citation-weighted
patents. Table V reports estimates of equation (12) using the
citation-based measure θ cw . Examining the response of future
growth and productivity to own innovation, we again see a strong
positive association. Comparing these estimates of a to those of
Table IV, we note that they are smaller in magnitude, typically
less than half. Specifically, a one standard deviation change in a
firm’s innovation, as measured using citations-weighted patents,
is associated with a 2.5% increase in profits, 1.9% increase in
output, 1.5% increase in capital investment, 1.5% increase in employment and a 1% increase in productivity. These smaller magnitudes are not surprising, since firm investment decisions are
related to the private value of innovation, which may be imperfectly reflected in the number of citations to the patent.
More important, the results in Table V reveal no evidence
for creative destruction. The estimated coefficients b are either
positive or not statistically different from 0. The stronger pattern
of creative destruction associated with θ sm is consistent with our
conjecture above that our measure is more highly correlated with
the private value of a patent relative to patent citations. Citations, on the other hand, are more likely to be correlated with the
19. See, for example, Syverson (2011) and Haltiwanger (2012). While some
of the measured differences likely reflect imperfections in the measurement of
productivity, they also reflect, to a large degree, real differences in firms’ ability to
generate revenue for given capital and labor inputs.
20. A direct comparison between our results and Bloom and Van Reenen
(2007) is difficult because their management quality measure is a stock measure,
while our innovation measure is a flow measure. Specifically, Bloom and Van
Reenen (2007) find that spanning the interquartile range of the management
score distribution, for example, corresponds to a productivity change of between
3.2% and 7.5%, which is between 10% and 23% of the interquartile range of TFP
in their sample.

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

694

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
TABLE V
INNOVATION AND FIRM GROWTH (USING CITATION-WEIGHTED PATENTS)
Firm (Horizon)

Competitors (Horizon)

1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
Panel A: Profits
0.006 0.011 0.016 0.020 0.025 −0.003 −0.003 −0.002 0.001 0.001
[5.00] [5.97] [5.58] [5.59] [5.81] [−1.82] [−1.30] [−1.18] [−0.38] [−0.36]
Panel B: Output
0.002 0.005 0.011 0.015 0.019
[1.36] [2.00] [3.58] [3.88] [4.42]

0.001
[0.16]

0.002
[0.36]

0.002
[0.17]

0.002
[0.14]

0.002
[0.15]

Panel C: Capital
−0.003 0.000 0.004 0.010 0.015
[−2.46] [−0.06] [1.63] [3.04] [3.51]

0.002
[1.63]

0.003
[1.18]

0.003
[0.89]

0.003
[0.63]

0.004
[0.79]

Panel D: Labor
−0.001 0.002 0.007 0.012 0.015
[−0.92] [0.92] [2.74] [3.73] [3.82]

0.005
[2.82]

0.007
[2.58]

0.009
[2.79]

0.011
[2.56]

0.013
[2.54]

Panel E: TFPR
0.005 0.008 0.008 0.009 0.010 −0.001 −0.001
[3.66] [4.22] [4.08] [3.97] [4.00] [−0.83] [−0.39]

0.001
[0.22]

0.002
[0.76]

0.003
[0.98]

Notes. Table reports point estimates of equation (12) for firm profits, output, capital, employment and
TFPR. See notes to Table III for variable definitions. We relate firm growth and productivity to innovation
, defined in equation [10]; see also [9]) and the innovation by the
by the firm (weighted using citations, θ CW
f
CW , the average innovation of other firms in the same SIC3 industry, see equation [11]).
firm’s competitors (θ I\
f
Controls include one lag of the dependent variable, log values of firm capital, employment, and the firm’s
idiosyncratic volatility, and industry (I) and time (T) fixed effects. All variables are winsorized at the 1%
level using annual breakpoints. Standard errors are clustered by firm and year, t-statistics are reported in
parentheses. All right-hand-side variables are scaled to unit standard deviation.

scientific value of a patent and thus more accurately measure the
impact of research externalities.
Last, we explore whether our measure and patent citations
contain independent information about future firm growth. That
cw
is, we reestimate equation (12) including both θ sm
f and θ f , as well
sm
cw
and
θ
.
We
report
the
estimation
results
in
Table VI.
as θ I\
f
I\ f
We see that the relation between θ sm and future firm growth and
productivity is comparable to those in Table IV. By contrast, the
relation between the citation-based measure and own firm growth
is in many cases not statistically different from 0. By design, our
measure and citation-weighted patent counts should contain independent information regarding externalities. Examining the right
panel of Table VI we note a strong negative effect of competitor innovation on firm growth and productivity measured using
value-weighted patent counts (θ sm ) and a positive effect when

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

695

TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION
TABLE VI
INNOVATION AND FIRM GROWTH (BOTH MEASURES)
Firm (Horizon)
1

2

3

Competitors (Horizon)
4

5

1

2

3

4

5

Panel A: Profits
0.017
0.027
[3.29] [4.11]
CW
0.002
0.006
[1.02] [1.97]

0.033
[3.41]
0.010
[2.25]

0.038 0.041
[3.53] [3.36]
0.014 0.019
[2.73] [3.27]

−0.015 −0.029 −0.031 −0.034 −0.036
[−2.98] [−5.04] [−7.05] [−5.74] [−5.54]
−0.002 −0.001
0.000
0.003
0.003
[−0.92] [−0.29] [−0.10] [0.57] [0.45]

Panel B: Output
0.009
0.015
[2.94] [3.14]
CW −0.001
0.000
[−0.52] [−0.09]

0.019
[2.91]
0.005
[1.45]

0.023 0.028
[2.71] [3.20]
0.008 0.012
[1.92] [2.45]

−0.015 −0.032 −0.041 −0.045 −0.051
[−3.70] [−7.73] [−8.87] [−8.00] [−7.53]
0.002
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.005
[0.79] [1.19] [1.08] [0.99] [0.94]

Panel C: Capital
0.013
0.023
0.029
0.033 0.038
[9.07] [6.61] [5.91] [4.58] [4.27]
CW −0.007 −0.008 −0.005
0.000 0.003
[−4.84] [−3.56] [−1.90] [−0.02] [0.68]

−0.001 −0.010 −0.019 −0.028 −0.038
[−0.22] [−1.75] [−2.61] [−3.40] [−4.44]
0.003
0.005
0.006
0.006
0.008
[2.47] [2.17] [1.87] [1.54] [1.67]

Panel D: Labor
0.008
0.014
[6.42] [4.40]
CW −0.004 −0.003
[−2.68] [−1.26]

0.018
[4.05]
0.001
[0.48]

0.022 0.023
[3.69] [3.24]
0.005 0.008
[1.39] [1.76]

−0.009 −0.020 −0.024 −0.026 −0.027
[−0.22] [−1.75] [−2.61] [−3.40] [−4.44]
0.006
0.009
0.012
0.014
0.016
[3.35] [3.32] [3.51] [3.18] [3.06]

Panel E: TFPR
0.013
0.016
[2.21] [2.16]
CW
0.001
0.003
[0.98] [1.87]

0.019
[2.66]
0.002
[1.17]

0.022 0.023
[3.35] [4.14]
0.002 0.002
[0.99] [0.94]

−0.002 −0.006 −0.010 −0.015 −0.017
[−1.17] [−2.51] [−3.50] [−4.69] [−4.31]
0.000
0.001
0.003
0.004
0.005
[0.37] [0.49] [1.08] [1.79] [1.98]

SM

SM

SM

SM

SM

Notes. Table relates firm growth and productivity to innovative output—equation (12)—using both the
stock market (SM) and the citation-weighted measure (CW). See notes to Tables III, IV, and V for variable
definitions and more details on the specification. All right-hand-side variables are scaled to unit standard
deviation. t-statistics are reported in parentheses.

innovation output is measured using citation-weighted patent
counts (θ cw ).
In sum, these findings allow us to draw two conclusions. First,
there is additional information about the quality of innovation in
our measure than what is captured in citations. This additional
information is most likely related to private values of a patent.
Depending on the intended application, one measure may be more
useful than the other.21 Second, using our estimate of the private
21. We could extend our methodology to estimate the value of a patent including its effect on competing firms, using the competitors’ stock market reaction.
This measure could be closer to the “social value” of innovation. We leave this task
for future research.

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

696

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

value of innovation, we document substantial patterns of creative
destruction relative to those previously documented.
4. Robustness and Caveats. The estimated value of innovative output θ sm
f,t contains information on the firm’s market valuation in the numerator but not in the denominator. Hence, one
potential concern is that fluctuations in θ sm
f,t simply reflect fluctuations in the market valuation of firm f rather than the value of
the innovative output of firm in year t. To address this concern,
we replace the book value of assets in the denominator of θ sm
f,t with
the firm’s stock market capitalization at the end of year t. We find
that doing so leads to similar results, although they are smaller
in magnitude by about one-third (see Table A.9 in the Online Appendix). Second, market values are measured at a point in time,
while citations are measured throughout the entire sample. As a
robustness check, we verify that results are similar when we only
measure citations within the first few years after the patent is
granted (see Table A.10 in the Online Appendix). A third caveat
is that the relation between innovation and firm growth we document is based on correlations and cannot be interpreted causally.
For instance, fast-growing firms may invest more in R&D and
thus also innovate more, but innovation may be unrelated to firm
growth. We found that including controls for R&D spending did
little to alter the magnitude of the estimated coefficients a and b
(Table A.11 in the Online Appendix). Fourth, it is possible that our
measure simply captures fluctuations in investor attention; if investors pay attention to fast-growing firms, this could explain our
results. We found that controlling for three proxies for investor
attention—the number of times the firm is mentioned in the Wall
Street Journal, the number of analyst coverage, and the fraction
of institutional ownership—did little to affect the economic and
statistical significance of our results (Table A.12 in the Online
Appendix).
More generally, we measure the private value of innovative
output with substantial measurement error. In particular, as we
can see from equation (1), this measurement error depends on
the ex ante likelihood of the patent being granted.22 We cannot
22. Estimating the ex ante likelihood of a patent grant requires information
on patent applications. As noted earlier, such data are only available post-2001.
However, as of 2015, there is no reliable publicly available assignee information
in these patent applications.

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION

697

rule out the possibility that this measurement error covaries with
unobservable factors that also determine firm growth. To partly alleviate these concerns, we use the R&D price variable constructed
by Bloom, Schankerman, and Van Reenen (2013) as an instrument. This R&D price is constructed at an annual level for each
firm using state-level R&D tax credits. This price varies across
firms because different states have different levels of R&D tax
credits and corporation tax, which will differentially affect firms
depending on their cross-state distribution of R&D activity. In
addition, we construct an R&D price for competing firms in a similar manner to equation (11), that is, equal to the average R&D
price of firms competing with firm f. We then use the firm and
competitor R&D price to instrument for θ f and θ I\f when estimating equation (12). The first-stage regression reveals a strong,
negative, relation between the firm and competitor R&D price
and firm and competitor innovation outcomes, respectively. Importantly, the second stage estimates are qualitatively similar to
our baseline results, though the magnitudes are stronger (see Table A.13 in the Online Appendix).
V. AGGREGATE EFFECTS OF INNOVATION
Here we assess the role of technological innovation in accounting for medium-run fluctuations in aggregate economic growth
and TFP. A notable challenge facing real business cycle models
is the scarcity of evidence linking movements in TFP to clearly
identifiable measures of technological change. At the aggregate
level, whether technological innovation is socially valuable in endogenous growth models depends on the degree to which it contributes to aggregate productivity—as opposed to simply being a
force for reallocation and creative destruction. If the creative destruction effects dominate, an increase in aggregate innovation
activity would lead to resource reallocation across firms but only
minor increases in output.
We tackle this question in two ways. First, the results in the
previous section illustrate that an increase in a firm’s innovative
output is associated with higher growth and productivity; by contrast, innovation by competing firms has the opposite effect. In
Section V.A, we use firm-level estimates of Section IV.B to examine the net impact of innovation on aggregate output and productivity. Second, in Section V.B, we propose an aggregate index of
innovation activity—that is based on a simple model of

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

698

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

innovation—and relate the index to aggregate output and productivity.

V.A. Aggregating Coefficients
As a first step in assessing the net impact of innovation, we
examine what our empirical estimates in Section IV.B imply about
the net effect of innovation within our sample of publicly traded
firms. To do so, we need to compare the relative magnitudes of
the estimated coefficients a and b in equation (12). However, since
the equation is expressed in terms of growth rates, we cannot
determine the sign and the magnitude of the net effect by simply
comparing the two coefficients a and b.
We thus proceed as follows. We first compute the portion of
the dollar change in the size X of firm f between time t and t + τ
that is associated with its own innovation and the innovation by
other firms in the same industry as
(13)




X̂ f,t+τ − X̂f,t+τ = exp âτ θ f t + b̂τ θ I\ f,t + ĉτ Z f t − exp ĉτ Z f t X f,t ,
where we have made explicit the dependence of the estimated
regression coefficients on the horizon, τ . Here, we use the notation
X to refer to the counterfactual level of X in the case in which
our measure is uniformly equal to 0. Second, we aggregate these
estimates across all firms in the sample to obtain the average
component of aggregate growth related to innovation,

(14)

Ĝτ =

T
1 

T

t=1



⎡
⎣1
τ

f

X̂ f,t+τ − X̂f,t+τ
f X f,t

⎤
⎦,

In equation (14), the numerator and denominator sum across all
firms that survive to time τ . The term inside the brackets can be
interpreted as the annual aggregate growth rate between periods t
and t + τ that is related to firm innovation, subject to two caveats:
(i) we omit some general equilibrium effects due to the presence
of time dummies in equation (12) and (ii) our estimate aggregates
outcomes within our sample of public firms.

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

699

TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION

Similarly, we can define an index of creative destruction in a
manner analogous of excess reallocation (using the definition of
Davis, Haltiwanger, and Schuh 1998), as
(15)


T
1  1
D̂τ =
T
τ


f | X̂ f,t+τ − X̂ f,t+τ |
f Xf t

t=1


− |Ĝt,t+τ | .

Equation (15) measures the degree of cross-sectional volatility in
growth rates that is related to innovation. To assess the magnitudes of equations (14) and (15) we can compare them to their
realized counterparts,
(16)


T
1  1
Gτ =
T
τ

f

X f,t+τ − X f,t



f X f,t

t=1

and
(17)


T
1  1
Dτ =
T
τ
t=1

f |X f,t+τ − X f,t |
f Xf t


− |Gt,t+τ | .

When comparing our aggregate estimate of reallocation equation (15) to its realized counterpart equation (17), note that D̂τ
is based on predicted values, hence it is unlikely to capture a
substantial fraction of fluctuations in realized firm growth rates,
since these are hard to predict.
Our estimates imply that the contribution of innovation to
aggregate growth is positive and substantial. To conserve space,
we only report the highest value across horizons τ . Our estimate
of Ĝτ implies that our estimate of innovation can account for an
average net growth rate of up to 0.8% in firm profits, 0.1% in firm
output, 0.7% in capital, and 0.1% in the number of employees.
Comparing these estimates to the mean aggregate growth rate
for the corresponding variables G within our sample of public
firms, we find that innovation can account for a fraction of 5% to
23% of net economic growth.
The degree of creative destruction implied by our estimates
is also substantial. Our estimates of D̂ imply that innovation can
account for a mean cross-sectional dispersion of 0.5% in firm profits, dispersion of 0.5% in sales growth rates, 0.3% in growth rates
of capital, and 0.3% in the change in the number of employees.
Comparing these magnitudes to the realized dispersion in firm

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

700

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

growth rates, D, we find them to be approximately 6% to 19%
of their realized counterparts. Our estimates thus suggest that
differences in innovative outcomes can account for a substantial
fraction of ex post differences in firm growth rates.23
In sum, our analysis suggests that in the aggregate, innovation is associated with significant resource reallocation and
growth. Although this firm-level analysis has several appealing
features, its findings should be interpreted with caution for at
least two reasons. First, our estimates are based on comparing
outcomes within a sample of public firms. They omit any effect
of innovation by these public firms on private firms in the industry. Second, our empirical specification (12) includes time fixed
effects to control for unobserved changes in the economic environment that are unrelated to innovation. However, these time
effects could also absorb some of the general equilibrium effects of
innovation by firms in our sample. We next explore an alternative
approach that constructs an aggregate index of innovation that is
motivated by an economic model.
V.B. Aggregate Index of Innovation
Here we construct an economy-wide index of innovation output. To aggregate our firm-level innovation measures to a composite, we need to make particular assumptions about how firm
monopoly profits relate to aggregate improvements in TFP. In
the Appendix, we provide a simple model of innovation—based
on Atkeson and Burstein (2011)—that delivers an approximately

23. We can also similarly aggregate the firm-level coefficients we obtained in
Section IV.B using the citation-based measure. We would expect the relation between aggregate innovation and growth to be greater when using citation-weighted
patent counts for two reasons. First, citations may include research externalities
that need not be captured by our measure. Second, since citations are an imperfect
estimate of private value, they underestimate the effect of creative destruction.
Both of these effects should in theory imply that citation-weighted patent counts
will overestimate the relation between innovation and growth relative to what
would be obtained using our measure. However, the empirical evidence is mixed.
We find that when using citation-weighted patent counts, innovation can account
for an average net growth rate of up to 0.4% in firm profits, 0.2% in firm output,
0.2% in capital, and 0.4% in the number of employees. These estimates are comparable in magnitude to those obtained using our baseline measure. Importantly, the
degree of creative destruction implied by the citation-weighted patent measure is
essentially 0.

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION

701

linear relation between the two.24 After discussing the descriptive
properties of the index, we examine its correlation with measures
of aggregate productivity and economic growth.
1. Methodology. We construct an economy-wide index of innovation as

sm
(18)
χ̂t = Yt−1
ft .
f ∈Ft

Equation (18) is equal to the sum of the value of all patents granted
in year t to the firms in our sample, scaled by aggregate output
Y. The construction of the index (18) is motivated by a simple
model of innovation, described in the Appendix. In the model,
the index (18) is approximately proportional to the productivity
(and output) gains from improvements in the aggregate technology frontier.
A potential concern with the index (18) is that its fluctuations may capture movements in “discount rates,” or more generally, fluctuations in the level of stock prices that are unrelated
to fundamentals. To address this concern, we also construct an
alternative index, in which instead of output Y we scale by the
total market capitalization of the firms in our sample in year t.
In the model, the level of the stock market is a constant multiple
of output, hence these two indices coincide. In the data, the correlation between the two indices is 0.89 in levels and 0.75 in first
differences.
We plot the two innovation indices in Panels A and B of Figure IV . We see that both indices line up well with the three major waves of technological innovation in the United States. First,
both indices suggest high values of technological innovation in
the 1930s, consistent with the evidence compiled in Field (2003),
and Alexopoulos and Cohen (2009, 2011).25 When we dissect the
composition of the index, we find that firms that primarily contribute to technological developments during the 1930s are in the
24. Alternative models of innovation may result in different functional relations between firm profits and aggregate productivity improvements, particularly
quality-ladder models with endogenous markups. These models would therefore
generate alternative innovation indices. We leave this for future work.
25. Notably, our series peaks slightly earlier in the 1930s than Alexopoulos
and Cohen (2011). This seems reasonable since our measure is based on patents
as opposed to commercialization dates that their measure captures.

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

702

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

(A)

(B)

(D)

(C)

(E)

(F)

FIGURE IV
Aggregate Measures of Innovation
Panel A plots the log values of the baseline innovation index—see equation (18)
in the text—which is equal to the sum of the market reaction of patents granted
in year t scaled by aggregate output. Panel B presents the alternative index constructed by scaling the market value of patents by the market capitalization of
all the firms at the end of the year t. Panel C plots the total number of patents
granted each year divided by population from the U.S. Census Bureau. Panel D
plots the mean market value per patent granted each year (in logs). Panel E plots
the real value of R&D expenditure (using the BEA deflator for R&D) to the total
number of patents granted, in logs. Panel F plots the difference between the series
in Panels D and E.

automobile (such as General Motors) and telecommunication
(such as AT&T) sectors. This description is consistent with studies
that have examined which sectors and firms led to technological
developments and progress in the 1930s (Smiley 1994). Second,
our measure suggests higher innovative activity during the 1960s
and early 1970s—a period commonly recognized as a period of
high innovation in the United States (see Laitner and Stolyarov
2003). Indeed, this was a period that saw development in chemicals, oil, and computing/electronics—the same sectors we find to
be contributing the most to our measure with major innovators
being firms such as IBM, GE, 3M, Exxon, Eastman Kodak, du
Pont, and Xerox. Third, developments in computing and telecommunication have brought about the latest wave of technological
progress in the 1990s and 2000s, which coincides with the high
values of our measure. In particular, it is argued that this is a
period when innovations in telecommunications and computer

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION

703

networking spawned a vast computer hardware and software industry and revolutionized the way many industries operate. We
find that firms that are main contributors to our measure belong
to these sectors, with firms such as Sun Microsystems, Oracle,
EMC, Dell, Intel, IBM, AT&T, Cisco, Microsoft, and Apple being
the leaders of the pack.
For comparison, we also plot the number of patents per capita
in Panel C. We see that our indices display different behavior
than the total number of patents, especially in the beginning and
toward the end of the sample.26 In particular, post-1980, there is a
rapid acceleration of the number of patents granted. Even though
a fraction of this increase likely reflects an acceleration in the pace
of technological innovation, an increase in patent grants can also
arise due to changes in the legal environment (Henry and Turner
2006).
To isolate the fluctuations in our index that are independent
from changes in the number of patents granted, in Panel D we
plot the average value per patent—that is, we plot the numerator
of equation (18) scaled by the total number of patents granted to
firms in our sample in each year. Comparing Panel D to Panels A
and B, we can immediately see that most of the low-frequency
fluctuation in our indices is driven by fluctuations in the average
value of patents.27
Further, our economy-wide innovation measure allows us to
shed some light on the puzzle raised by Kortum (1993), among others, regarding the secular increase in the ratio of R&D to patents.
Indeed, as we see in Panel E, the ratio of R&D expenditures, deflated by the BEA R&D deflator, to the total number of patents
granted in the United States exhibits a secular increase.
Kortum (1993) examines three of the potential explanations using a structural model, namely, (i) a decline in the productivity
in the research sector; (ii) an increase in the value of patents due
to market expansion; and (iii) a decline in the patenting rate due
to increased costs of patenting. Consistent with the conclusions
in Kortum (1993), we find support for the second explanation. In
particular, we construct a ratio of average value per patent at
26. The correlation between χ̂t and the log number of patents is equal to 60–
75% in levels and 14–18% in first differences, depending on whether we scale χ̂t
by output or aggregate stock market capitalization.
27. In results that appear in an earlier version of this article, we show that
our index is also related to the index of Alexopoulos and Cohen (2009).

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

704

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

time t as the total estimated value of all granted patents in year
t, granted to the set of firms in our sample, divided by the total
number of patents granted to these firms in year t. As we see
in Panel F, the ratio of costs to benefits—the difference between
the series in Panel E and the series in Panel D—has shown a
markedly slower decline.
Naturally, our time-series index comes with several caveats.
First, part of the time-series fluctuation in our innovation index
may be due to changes in the likelihood of patent approval—or
more generally, the joint distribution of π j and ξ j . Along these
lines, the degree of market efficiency may have changed over
time. Last, the composition of patenting firms likely has changed
over the decades. Next we examine whether, despite all these
caveats, our index contains meaningful information about economic growth.
2. Innovation and Aggregate Growth. Here, we examine
the extent to which our economy-wide innovation measures account for short- and medium-run fluctuations in aggregate output
growth and productivity. We measure output as the per capita
GDP deflated by the consumer price index, and productivity as
the utilization-adjusted TFP from Basu, Fernald, and Kimball
(2006). To study the relation between our innovation index and
aggregate growth, we estimate the following specification:

(19)

xt+τ − xt = a0 + aτ log χ̂t +

L


cl xt−l + ut+τ .

l=0

Here x is our variable of interest—log aggregate output or log
TFP—and χ is our index of innovation. We examine horizons
of one to five years. We select the number of lags L using the
Bayesian information criterion, which advocates a lag length of
one to three years depending on the specification. We compute
standard errors using Newey-West with a maximum lag length
equal to τ + 4.
In the first row of Figure V, we plot the response of aggregate
output and total factor productivity to a unit standard deviation
shock in our baseline innovation index (18). We see that over a period of five years, a one standard deviation increase in our index is
followed by approximately a 6.5% increase in output growth and
a 3.4% increase in aggregate productivity. The results using the

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

705

TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION
(B)

(A)

FIGURE V
Innovation and Aggregate Growth
Figure shows the estimated response of output per capita and productivity to
innovation using equation (19) in the main text. Dotted lines represent 90% confidence intervals using Newey-West standard errors with maximum lag length
equal to 2 plus the horizon. Productivity is utilization-adjusted TFP from Basu,
Fernald, and Kimball (2006). Output is GDP (NIPA Table 1.1.5) divided by the consumption price index (St. Louis Fed, CPIAUCNS). Output per capita is computed
using population from the U.S. Census Bureau.

alternative scaling—total market capitalization of firms in our
sample as opposed to aggregate output—are comparable, though
somewhat smaller in magnitude. As we see in the second row of
Figure V, the response of output and productivity to a unit standard deviation change in the alternative index scaled by market
capitalization is 5.5% and 2.1% over five years, respectively.28
28. In addition to equation (19), we also estimated impulse responses using
bivariate VARs. The results are similar though the magnitudes are somewhat
weaker: a one standard deviation increase in our index is followed by approximately a 1.7%–2.2% increase in output growth and a 0.6%–1% increase in aggregate productivity. See Online Appendix Table A.3 for more details.

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

706

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

In sum, we find that waves of innovation are followed by an
acceleration in aggregate output and productivity growth. These
results are consistent with the estimates obtained from aggregating the coefficients from the firm-level analysis in Section
V.A. However, they are in contrast to Shea (1999), who finds
only a weak relation between patents and measured TFP. Taken
together, these findings suggest that our innovation index contains additional information about aggregate growth relative to
what is included in simple patent counts. Further, the fact that
the response of productivity and output are similar regardless
of our choice of scaling variable—aggregate output or market
capitalization—suggests that this predictability is not driven by
information that is contained in the level of the stock market.
VI. CONCLUSION
Using patent data for U.S. firms from 1926 to 2010, we propose
a new measure of the economic importance of each innovation that
exploits the stock market response to news about patents. Our
patent-level estimates of private economic value are strongly positively related to the scientific value of these patents—as measured
by the number of forward citations that the patent receives in the
future. Consistent with the predictions of Schumpeterian growth
models, innovation using our measure is associated with substantial growth, reallocation and creative destruction. Our measure
contains significant information in addition to citation-weighted
patent counts; the relation between our measure and firm growth
is substantially stronger. Aggregating our measure suggests that
technological innovation accounts for significant medium-run fluctuations in aggregate economic growth and TFP.
In conclusion, three issues are worth reiterating. First, the
main idea behind our innovation measure—that the private value
of a patent can be extracted using stock price reaction around its
grant—is quite general. Hence, we expect our measures of technological innovation and those constructed based on a similar idea
around other events, such as drug approvals, to be useful beyond
just the settings considered in the article. Second, our empirical
findings should be interpreted as providing support for the general Schumpeterian hypothesis that technological innovation is a
significant driver of both economic growth and creative destruction. These predictions emerge in a wide variety of models that
have been explored in the literature (e.g., Romer 1990; Grossman

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

707

TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION

and Helpman 1991; Aghion and Howitt 1992; Klette and Kortum
2004) and are not tied to the specific model used in the article.
Third, our innovation measure provides information that is complementary to the information contained in patent citations. By
construction, our approach is geared toward measuring the private value of innovation; by contrast, patent citations are likely a
better measure of the scientific value of the patent.
APPENDIX: A MODEL OF INNOVATION
Here we briefly present a simple model of innovation that is
based on Atkeson and Burstein (2011).
A. Setup
There is a competitive representative firm producing a single
consumption good (the numeraire) from a variety of intermediate
goods according to the production function

(20)

Ht

Yt =
0

  (ρ−1)
θ j q j,t ρ dj
1
ρ

ρ
 (ρ−1)

.

The parameter ρ > 1 governs the elasticity of substitution between goods; θ j indexes the quality of good j; and qj, t denotes the
quantity of good j produced at time t. The nondecreasing process
Ht represents the current measure of intermediate goods, which
evolves according to
Ht = Ht−1 + Nt ,
where N is a positive random variable described below. Importantly, new goods created at time t draw their quality θ from a
distribution ft (θ ) that is allowed to vary over
 time. Denote the
mean of that distribution at time t by θ̄t = θ ft (θ )dθ . To have a
balanced growth path, we assume that θ̄t Nt = χt Xt−1 , where
(21)

Xt ≡

 Ht

θ j dj,

0

and χ t > 0 is an i.i.d. random variable. These assumptions imply
that
(22)

X t = Xt−1 (1 + χt ) .

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

708

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

Each good is produced according to a linear production technology,

q j,t = l j,t .

(23)

In the model, all goods are patented. The firm that owns the patent
for good j acts like a monopolist.
Last, consumers have log utility over consumption,
U (Ct ) = log Ct ,

(24)

and discount the future using a subjective discount factor β.
Households inelastically supply a unit of labor services at the
equilibrium wage w.
B. Equilibrium
Using standard arguments, it is straightforward to show that
the inverse demand for good j is given by

(25)

p j,t =

q j,t
Yt

− ρ1

1

θ jρ .

Using (equation 25), total profits from producing good j equal
(26)

1
1− 1 
 j,t ≡ p j,t q j,t − wt q j,t = q j,t ρ Yt θ j ρ − wt q j,t .

Maximizing the above expression with respect to quantity produced (q) yields

q j,t = Yt θ j
(27)

wt

−ρ

1 − ρ1

= θ j X−1
t ,

where the last equality follows from clearing the labor market—
requiring that
 Ht
(28)

q j,t dj = 1.

0

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

709

TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION

Using (equation 20), we get that aggregate output and consumption are given by
1

Yt = X tρ−1 ,

(29)

while the equilibrium wage is given by
wt =

(30)

ρ−1
Yt ,
ρ

and flow profits from owning a patent to good j are
 j,t =

(31)

1
2−ρ
θ j Yt .
ρ

Next we examine the market value of a patent. The market value
of a patent for good j is equal to the present value of the monopoly
profits associated with good j, using the household’s stochastic
discount factor,
∞



s−t U (Cs )
(32)
β
 j,s = θ j Yt X−1
ξ j,t ≡ Et
t B,
 (C )
U
t
s=t
where
(33)

∞
 

Xt
1
s−t
β
B = Et
ρ
Xs
s=t

is a constant.
Using (equation 32), we add up the value of all new patents
at time t, and divide by output,
χ̂t = Yt−1

 Ht
Ht−1

ξ j,t dj = B X−1
t

 Ht

θ j dj

Ht−1

X t − X t−1
Xt
χt
=
.
1 + χt
∝

(34)

The key result of the model is that, to a first-order approximation
(small χ t ), the aggregate index χ̂t is proportional to the growth
rate in aggregate output and productivity χ t .

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

710

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

Last, rather than dividing by aggregate output, we could also
have divided by the value of the stock market, which is equal to

(35)

Mt = Et



∞


U  (Cs )
β s−t 
(Ys − ws )
U (Ct )
s=t

=

1
Yt .
ρ (1 − β)

Since the stock market is proportional to aggregate output, similar
results obtain.
MIT SLOAN AND NBER
KELLOGG SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT AND NBER
BOOTH SCHOOL OF BUSINESS AND NBER
KELLY SCHOOL OF BUSINESS
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
An Online Appendix for this article can be found at The Quarterly Journal of Economics online.
REFERENCES
Abrams, David S., Ufuk Akcigit, and Jillian Popadak, “Patent Value and Citations:
Creative Destruction or Strategic Disruption?,” NBER Working Paper 19647,
2013.
Acemoglu, Daron, Ufuk Akcigit, Nick Bloom, and Kerr William, “Innovation, Reallocation and Growth,” Working paper, Stanford University, 2011.
Aghion, Philippe, and Peter Howitt, “A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction,” Econometrica, 60 (1992), 323–351
Alexopoulos, Michelle, “Read All about It!! What Happens Following a Technology
Shock?,” American Economic Review, 101 (2011), 1144–1179.
Alexopoulos, Michelle, and Jon Cohen, “Measuring Our Ignorance, One Book at a
Time: New Indicators of Technological Change, 1909–1949,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 56 (2009), 450–470.
———, “Volumes of Evidence: Examining Technical Change in the Last Century
through a New Lens,” Canadian Journal of Economics, 44 (2011), 413–450.
Andersen, Torben G., and Timo Terasvirta, “Realized Volatility,” in Handbook of
Financial Time Series, Thomas Mikosch, Jens-Peter Kreiu, Richard A. Davis
and Torben Gustav Andersen, eds. (Berlin: Springer, 2009), 555–575.
Atkeson, Andrew, and Ariel T. Burstein, “Aggregate Implications of Innovation
Policy,” NBER Working Paper 17493, 2011.
Austin, David H., “An Event-Study Approach to Measuring Innovative Output:
The Case of Biotechnology,” American Economic Review, 83 (1993), 253–258.
Basu, Susanto, John G. Fernald, and Miles S. Kimball, “Are Technology Improvements Contractionary?,” American Economic Review, 96 (2006), 1418–1448.
Baumol, William J., The Free-Market Innovation Machine: Analyzing the Growth
Miracle of Capitalism (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2002).
Bernstein, Jeffrey I., and M. Ishaq Nadiri, “Research and Development and Intraindustry Spillovers: An Empirical Application of Dynamic Duality,” Review of
Economic Studies, 56 (1989), 249–267.

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION

711

Bird, R. E., K. D. Hardman, J. W. Jacobson, S. Johnson, B. M. Kaufman, S. M. Lee,
T. Lee, S. H. Pope, G. S. Riordan, and M. Whitlow, “Single-Chain AntigenBinding Proteins,” Science, 242 (1988), 423–426.
Bloom, Nicholas, Mark Schankerman, and John Van Reenen, “Identifying Technology Spillovers and Product Market Rivalry,” Econometrica, 81 (2013), 1347–
1393.
Bloom, Nicholas, and John Van Reenen, “Measuring and Explaining Management
Practices across Firms and Countries,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122
(2007), 1351–1408.
Caballero, Ricardo J., and Adam B. Jaffe, “How High Are the Giants’ Shoulders:
An Empirical Assessment of Knowledge Spillovers and Creative Destruction
in a Model of Economic Growth,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1993,
vol. 8 (Cambridge, MA: NBER, 1993).
Campbell, J. Y., A. W. C. Lo, and A. C. MacKinlay, The Econometrics of Financial
Markets (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1997).
Carley, Michael, Deepak Hegde, and Alan C. Marco, “What Is the Probability of
Receiving a U.S. Patent?,” Yale Journal of Law and Technology, 17 (2015),
article 5.
Davis, Steven J., John C. Haltiwanger, and Scott Schuh, Job Creation and Destruction (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998).
Evans, David S., “Tests of Alternative Theories of Firm Growth,” Journal of Political Economy, 95 (1987), 657–674.
Field, Alexander J., “The Most Technologically Progressive Decade of the Century,”
American Economic Review, 93 (2003), 1399–1413.
Gali, Jordi, “Technology, Employment, and the Business Cycle: Do Technology
Shocks Explain Aggregate Fluctuations?,” American Economic Review, 89
(1999), 249–271.
Garcia-Macia, Daniel, Chang-Tai Hsieh, and Peter J. Klenow, “How Destructive
Is Innovation?,” NBER Working Paper No. 22953, 2015.
Giuri, Paola, Myriam Mariani, Stefano Brusoni, Gustavo Crespi, Dominique Francoz, Alfonso Gambardella, Walter Garcia-Fontes, Aldo Geuna, Raul Gonzales,
Dietmar Harhoff, and Karin Hoisl, “Inventors and Invention Processes in Europe: Results from the PatVal-EU Survey,” Research Policy, 36 (2007), 1107–
1127.
Griliches, Zvi, “Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: A Survey,” Journal of
Economic Literature, 28 (1990), 1661–1707.
Grossman, Gene M., and Elhanan Helpman, “Quality Ladders in the Theory of
Growth,” Review of Economic Studies, 58 (1991), 43–61.
Hall, B. H., and R. H. Ziedonis, “The Patent Paradox Revisited: An Empirical Study
of Patenting in the U.S. Semiconductor Industry, 1979–1995,” RAND Journal
of Economics, 32 (2001), 101–128.
Hall, Bronwyn H., Adam B. Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg, “Market Value and
Patent Citations,” RAND Journal of Economics, 36 (2005), 16–38.
Haltiwanger, John, “Job Creation and Firm Dynamics in the United States,” in
Innovation Policy and the Economy, vol. 12 (Cambridge, MA: NBER, 2012),
17–38.
Harhoff, Dietmar, Francis Narin, F. M. Scherer, and Katrin Vopel, “Citation Frequency and the Value of Patented Inventions,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 81 (1999), 511–515.
Harhoff, Dietmar, Frederic M. Scherer, and Katrin Vopel, “Exploring the Tail of
Patented Invention Value Distributions,” CIG Working Papers FS IV 97-27,
Wissenschaftszentrum Berlin, Research Unit: Competition and Innovation,
1997.
Henry, Matthew D., and John L. Turner, “The Court of Appeals for the Federal
Circuit’s Impact on Patent Litigation,” Journal of Legal Studies, 35 (2006),
85–117.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Peter J. Klenow, “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in
China and India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124 (2009), 1403–1448.

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

712

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

Imrohoroglu, Ayse, and Selale Tuzel, “Firm Level Productivity, Risk, and Return,”
Management Science, 60 (2014).
Klette, Tor Jakob, and Samuel Kortum, “Innovating Firms and Aggregate Innovation,” Journal of Political Economy, 112 (2004), 986–1018.
Kortum, Samuel, “Equilibrium R&D and the Patent-R&D Ratio: U.S. Evidence,”
American Economic Review, 83 (1993), 450–457.
Kortum, Samuel, and Josh Lerner, “Stronger Protection or Technological Revolution: What Is Behind the Recent Surge in Patenting?,” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, 48 (1998), 247–304.
Laitner, John, and Dmitriy Stolyarov, “Technological Change and the Stock Market,” American Economic Review, 93 (2003), 1240–1267.
Lamont, Owen, and Andrea Frazzini, “The Earnings Announcement Premium and
Trading Volume,” NBER Working Paper 13090, 2007.
Lampe, Ryan, and Petra Moser, “Do Patent Pools Encourage Innovation? Evidence
from 20 Industries in the 1930s,” Chapter in NBER book Standards, Patents
and Innovations, 2014.
Lentz, Rasmus, and Dale T. Mortensen, “An Empirical Model of Growth through
Product Innovation,” Econometrica, 76 (2008), 1317–1373.
Moser, Petra, Joerg Ohmstedt, and Paul Rhode, “Patents, Citations, and Inventive
Output—Evidence from Hybrid Corn,” NBER Working Paper No. w21443,
2011.
Moser, Petra, and Alessandra Voena, “Compulsory Licensing: Evidence from the
Trading with the Enemy Act,” American Economic Review, 102 (2012), 396–
427.
Moser, Petra, Alessandra Voena, and Fabian Waldinger, “German-Jewish Emigres
and U.S. Invention,” NBER Working Paper No. 19962, 2012.
Myers, Stewart C., and Nicholas S. Majluf, “Corporate Financing and Investment
Decisions When Firms Have Information That Investors Do Not Have,” Journal of Financial Economics, 13 (1984), 187–221.
Nicholas, Tom, “Does Innovation Cause Stock Market Runups? Evidence from the
Great Crash,” American Economic Review, 98 (2008), 1370–1396.
Olley, G. Steven, and Ariel Pakes, “The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications Equipment Industry,” Econometrica, 64 (1996), 1263–1297.
Pakes, Ariel, “On Patents, R&D, and the Stock Market Rate of Return,” Journal
of Political Economy, 93 (1985), 390–409.
Romer, Paul M., “Endogenous Technological Change,” Journal of Political Economy, 98 (1990), S71–S102.
Scherer, F. M., “Firm Size, Market Structure, Opportunity, and the Output of
Patented Inventions,” American Economic Review, 55 (1965), 1097–1125.
Scherer, F. M., “The Propensity to Patent,” International Journal of Industrial
Organization, 1 (1983), 107–128.
Shea, John, “What Do Technology Shocks Do?,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual
1998, vol. 13 (Cambridge, MA: NBER, 1999), 275–322.
Simon, Herbert A., and Charles P. Bonini, “The Size Distribution of Business
Firms,” American Economic Review, 48 (1958), 607–617.
Smets, Frank, and Raf Wouters, “An Estimated Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium Model of the Euro Area,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 1 (2003), 1123–1175.
Smiley, G., The American Economy in the Twentieth Century (Mason, OH: SouthWestern, 1994).
Syverson, Chad, “Product Substitutability and Productivity Dispersion,” Review
of Economics and Statistics, 86 (2004), 534–550.
———, “What Determines Productivity?,” Journal of Economic Literature, 49
(2011), 326–365.

This content downloaded from
165.124.167.4 on Mon, 10 Nov 2025 18:35:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

