A CONTRIBUTION TO THE EMPIRICS OF
ECONOMIC GROWTH*
N. GREGORY MANKIW
DAVID ROMER

DAVID N. WEIL
This paper examines whether the Solow growth model is consistent with the
international variation in the standard of living. It shows that an augmented Solow
model that includes accumulation of human as well as physical capital provides an
excellent description of the cross-country data. The paper also examines the
implications of the Solow model for convergence in standards of living, that is, for
whether poor countries tend to grow faster than rich countries. The evidence
indicates that, holding population growth and capital accumulation constant,
countries converge at about the rate the augmented Solow model predicts.

INTRODUCTION

This paper takes Robert Solow seriously. In his classic 1956
article Solow proposed that we begin the study of economic growth
by assuming a standard neoclassical production function with
decreasing returns to capital. Taking the rates of saving and
population growth as exogenous, he showed that these two variables determine the steady-state level of income per capita. Because saving and population growth rates vary across countries,
different countries reach different steady states. Solow's model
gives simple testable predictions about how these variables influence the steady-state level of income. The higher the rate of saving,
the richer the country. The higher the rate of population growth,
the poorer the country.
This paper argues that the predictions of the Solow model are,
to a first approximation, consistent with the evidence. Examining
recently available data for a large set of countries, we find that
saving and population growth affect income in the directions that
Solow predicted. Moreover, more than half of the cross-country
variation in income per capita can be explained by these two
variables alone.
Yet all is not right for the Solow model. Although the model
correctly predicts the directions of the effects of saving and
*We are grateful to Karen Dynan for research assistance, to Laurence Ball,
Olivier Blanchard, Anne Case, Lawrence Katz, Robert King, Paul Romer, Xavier
Sala-i-Martin, Amy Salsbury, Robert Solow, Lawrence Summers, Peter Temin, and
the referees for helpful comments, and to the National Science Foundation for
financial support.
? 1992 by the President and Fellows of HarvardCollegeand the MassachusettsInstitute of
Technology.

The Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1992

408

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

population growth, it does not correctly predict the magnitudes. In
the data the effects of saving and population growth on income are
too large. To understand the relation between saving, population
growth, and income, one must go beyond the textbook Solow
model.
We therefore augment the Solow model by including accumulation of human as well as physical capital. The exclusion of human
capital from the textbook Solow model can potentially explain why
the estimated influences of saving and population growth appear
too large, for two reasons. First, for any given rate of humancapital accumulation, higher saving or lower population growth
leads to a higher level of income and thus a higher level of human
capital; hence, accumulation of physical capital and population
growth have greater impacts on income when accumulation of
human capital is taken into account. Second, human-capital accumulation may be correlated with saving rates and population
growth rates; this would imply that omitting human-capital accumulation biases the estimated coefficients on saving and population
growth.
To test the augmented Solow model, we include a proxy for
human-capital accumulation as an additional explanatory variable
in our cross-country regressions. We find that accumulation of
human capital is in fact correlated with saving and population
growth. Including human-capital accumulation lowers the estimated effects of saving and population growth to roughly the
values predicted by the augmented Solow model. Moreover, the
augmented model accounts for about 80 percent of the crosscountry variation in income. Given the inevitable imperfections in
this sort of cross-country data, we consider the fit of this simple
model to be remarkable. It appears that the augmented Solow
model provides an almost complete explanation of why some
countries are rich and other countries are poor.
After developing and testing the augmented Solow model, we
examine an issue that has received much attention in recent years:
the failure of countries to converge in per capita income. We argue
that one should not expect convergence. Rather, the Solow model
predicts that countries generally reach different steady states. We
examine empirically the set of countries for which nonconvergence
has been widely documented in past work. We find that once
differences in saving and population growth rates are accounted
for, there is convergence at roughly the rate that the model
predicts.

THE EMPIRICS OF ECONOMICGROWTH

409

Finally, we discuss the predictions of the Solow model for
international variation in rates of return and for capital movements. The model predicts that poor countries should tend to have
higher rates of return to physical and human capital. We discuss
various evidence that one might use to evaluate this prediction. In
contrast to many recent authors, we interpret the available
evidence on rates of return as generally consistent with the Solow
model.
Overall, the findings reported in this paper cast doubt on the
recent trend among economists to dismiss the Solow growth model
in favor of endogenous-growth models that assume constant or
increasing returns to scale in capital. One can explain much of the
cross-country variation in income while maintaining the assumption of decreasing returns. This conclusion does not imply, however, that the Solow model is a complete theory of growth: one
would like also to understand the determinants of saving, population growth, and worldwide technological change, all of which the
Solow model treats as exogenous. Nor does it imply that endogenousgrowth models are not important, for they may provide the right
explanation of worldwide technological change. Our conclusion
does imply, however, that the Solow model gives the right answers
to the questions it is designed to address.
I. THE TEXTBOOKSOLOWMODEL

We begin by briefly reviewing the Solow growth model. We
focus on the model's implications for cross-country data.
A. The Model
Solow's model takes the rates of saving, population growth,
and technological progress as exogenous. There are two inputs,
capital and labor, which are paid their marginal products. We
assume a Cobb-Douglas production function, so production at time
t is given by
(1)

Y(t) = K(t)a(A(t)L(t))l-

0 < a. < 1.

The notation is standard: Y is output, K capital, L labor, and A the
level of technology. L and A are assumed to grow exogenously at
rates n and g:
(2)

L (t) = L ()ent

(3)

A (t) = A (r)ent.

The number of effective units of labor, A (t)L (t), grows at rate n + g.

410

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

The model assumes that a constant fraction of output, s, is
invested. Defining k as the stock of capital per effective unit of
labor, k = KIAL, and y as the level of output per effective unit of
labor, y = Y/AL, the evolution of k is governed by
k(t) = sy(t) - (n + g + 8)k (t)

(4)

= sk(t)0 -

(n + g + 8)k(t),

where 8 is the rate of depreciation. Equation (4) implies that k
convergesto a steady-statevalue k* definedby sk *a = (n + g + 8)k *,
or
k* = [s/(n + g + 5)]1I(1-a)

(5)

The steady-state capital-labor ratio is related positively to the rate
of saving and negatively to the rate of population growth.
The central predictions of the Solow model concern the impact
of saving and population growth on real income. Substituting (5)
into the production function and taking logs, we find that steadystate income per capita is
(6)

(6)tl

In

[Ot]ln()gt

= In A (0) + gt + 1

In(s) - 1

ln(n + g + 8).

Because the model assumes that factors are paid their marginal
products, it predicts not only the signs but also the magnitudes of
the coefficients on saving and population growth. Specifically,
because capital's share in income (a) is roughly one third, the
model implies an elasticity of income per capita with respect to the
saving rate of approximately 0.5 and an elasticity with respect to
n + g + 8 of approximately -0.5.

B. Specification
The natural question to consider is whether the data support
the Solow model's predictions concerning the determinants of
standards of living. In other words, we want to investigate whether
real income is higher in countries with higher saving rates and
lower in countries with higher values of n + g + 5.
We assume that g and 8 are constant across countries. g
reflects primarily the advancement of knowledge, which is not
country-specific. And there is neither any strong reason to expect
depreciation rates to vary greatly across countries, nor are there
any data that would allow us to estimate country-specific depreciation rates. In contrast, the A(0) term reflects not just technology

THE EMPIRICS OF ECONOMIC GROWTH

411

but resource endowments, climate, institutions, and so on; it may
therefore differ across countries. We assume that
lnA(O) = a + E,
where a is a constant and E is a country-specific shock. Thus, log
income per capita at a given time-time 0 for simplicity-is
(7)

In

a+

In(s)-

In(n+g+8)+E.

Equation (7) is our basic empirical specification in this section.
We assume that the rates of saving and population growth are
independent of country-specific factors shifting the production
function. That is, we assume that s and n are independent of e. This
assumption implies that we can estimate equation (7) with ordinary least squares (OLS).1
There are three reasons for making this assumption of independence. First, this assumption is made not only in the Solow model,
but also in many standard models of economic growth. In any
model in which saving and population growth are endogenous but
preferences are isoelastic, s and n are unaffected by E. In other
words, under isoelastic utility, permanent differences in the level of
technology do not affect saving rates or population growth rates.
Second, much recent theoretical work on growth has been
motivated by informal examinations of the relationships between
saving, population growth, and income. Many economists have
asserted that the Solow model cannot account for the international
differences in income, and this alleged failure of the Solow model
has stimulated work on endogenous-growth theory. For example,
Romer [1987, 1989a] suggests that saving has too large an
influence on growth and takes this to be evidence for positive
externalities from capital accumulation. Similarly, Lucas [1988]
asserts that variation in population growth cannot account for any
substantial variation in real incomes along the lines predicted by
the Solow model. By maintaining the identifying assumption that s
and n are independent of E, we are able to determine whether
systematic examination of the data confirms these informal judgments.
1. If s and n are endogenous and influenced by the level of income, then
estimates of equation (7) using ordinary least squares are potentially inconsistent.
In this case, to obtain consistent estimates, one needs to find instrumental variables
that are correlated with s and n, but uncorrelated with the country-specific shift in
the production function e. Finding such instrumental variables is a formidable task,
however.

412

QUARTERLYJOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

Third, because the model predicts not just the signs but also
the magnitudes of the coefficients on saving and population
growth, we can gauge whether there are important biases in the
estimates obtained with OLS. As described above, data on factor
shares imply that, if the model is correct, the elasticities of Y/L
with respect to s and n + g + 8 are approximately 0.5 and -0.5. If
OLS yields coefficients that are substantially different from these
values, then we can reject the joint hypothesis that the Solow
model and our identifying assumption are correct.
Another way to evaluate the Solow model would be to impose
on equation (7) a value of aoderived from data on factor shares and
then to ask how much of the cross-country variation in income the
model can account for. That is, using an approach analogous to
"growth accounting," we could compute the fraction of the variance in living standards that is explained by the mechanism
identified by the Solow model.2 In practice, because we do not have
exact estimates of factor shares, we do not emphasize this growthaccounting approach. Rather, we estimate equation (7) by OLS and
examine the plausibility of the implied factor shares. The fit of this
regression shows the result of a growth-accounting exercise performed with the estimated value of a. If the estimated a differs
from the value obtained a priori from factor shares, we can
compare the fit of the estimated regression with the fit obtained by
imposing the a priori value.
C. Data and Samples
The data are from the Real National Accounts recently
constructed by Summers and Heston [1988]. The data set includes
real income, government and private consumption, investment,
and population for almost all of the world other than the centrally
planned economies. The data are annual and cover the period
1960-1985. We measure n as the average rate of growth of the
working-age population, where working age is defined as 15 to 64.3
We measure s as the average share of real investment (including
2. In standard growth accounting, factor shares are used to decompose growth
over time in a single country into a part explained by growth in factor inputs and an
unexplained part-the Solow residual-which is usually attributed to technological
change. In this cross-country analogue, factor shares are used to decompose
variation in income across countries into a part explained by variation in saving and
population growth rates and an unexplained part, which could be attributed to
international differences in the level of technology.
3. Data on the fraction of the population of working age are from the World
Bank's World Tables and the 1988 World Development Report.

THE EMPIRICS OF ECONOMICGROWTH

413

government investment) in real GDP, and Y/L as real GDP in 1985
divided by the working-age population in that year.
We consider three samples of countries. The most comprehensive consists of all countries for which data are available other than
those for which oil production is the dominant industry.4 This
sample consists of 98 countries. We exclude the oil producers
because the bulk of recorded GDP for these countries represents
the extraction of existing resources, not value added; one should
not expect standard growth models to account for measured GDP
in these countries.5
Our second sample excludes countries whose data receive a
grade of "D" from Summers and Heston or whose populations in
1960 were less than one million. Summers and Heston use the "D"
grade to identify countries whose real income figures are based on
extremely little primary data; measurement error is likely to be a
greater problem for these countries. We omit the small countries
because the determination of their real income may be dominated
by idiosyncratic factors. This sample consists of 75 countries.
The third sample consists of the 22 OECD countries with
populations greater than one million. This sample has the advantages that the data appear to be uniformly of high quality and that
the variation in omitted country-specific factors is likely to be
small. But it has the disadvantages that it is small in size and that it
discards much of the variation in the variables of interest.
See the Appendix for the countries in each of the samples and
the data.
D. Results
We estimate equation (7) both with and without imposing the
constraint that the coefficients on ln(s) and ln(n + g + 8) are equal
in magnitude and opposite in sign. We assume that g + 8 is 0.05;
reasonable changes in this assumption have little effect on the
estimates.6 Table I reports the results.
4. For purposes of comparability, we restrict the sample to countries that have
not only the data used in this section, but also the data on human capital described
in Section II.
5. The countries that are excluded on this basis are Bahrain, Gabon, Iran, Iraq,
Kuwait, Oman, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates. In addition, Lesotho is
excluded because the sum of private and government consumption far exceeds GDP
in every year of the sample, indicating that labor income from abroad constitutes an
extremely large fraction of GNP.
6. We chose this value of g + 8 to match the available data. In U. S. data the
capital consumption allowance is about 10 percent of GNP, and the capital-output
ratio is about three, which implies that 8 is about 0.03; Romer [1989a, p. 60]
presents a calculation for a broader sample of countries and concludes that 8 is

414

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
TABLE I
ESTIMATION
OF THETEXTBOOK
SOLOWMODEL
Dependent variable: log GDP per working-age person in 1985

Sample:
Observations:
CONSTANT
ln(I/GDP)
ln(n + g + 8)
H2
s.e.e.

Restricted regression:
CONSTANT
ln(I/GDP) - ln(n + g + 8)
1?2

s.e.e.

Test of restriction:
p-value
Implied a

Non-oil
98
5.48
(1.59)
1.42
(0.14)
-1.97
(0.56)
0.59
0.69

Intermediate
75
5.36
(1.55)
1.31
(0.17)
-2.01
(0.53)
0.59
0.61

OECD
22
7.97
(2.48)
0.50
(0.43)
-0.76
(0.84)
0.01
0.38

6.87
(0.12)
1.48
(0.12)
0.59
0.69

7.10
(0.15)
1.43
(0.14)
0.59
0.61

8.62
(0.53)
0.56
(0.36)
0.06
0.37

0.38
0.60
(0.02)

0.26
0.59
(0.02)

0.79
0.36
(0.15)

Note. Standard errors are in parentheses. The investment and population growth rates are averages for the
period 1960-1985. (g + 8) is assumed to be 0.05.

Three aspects of the results support the Solow model. First,
the coefficients on saving and population growth have the predicted
signs and, for two of the three samples, are highly significant.
Second, the restriction that the coefficients on ln(s) and
ln(n + g + 8) are equal in magnitude and opposite in sign is not
rejected in any of the samples. Third, and perhaps most important,
differences in saving and population growth account for a large
fraction of the cross-country variation in income per capita. In the
regression for the intermediate sample, for example, the adjusted
R2 is 0.59. In contrast to the common claim that the Solow model
"explains" cross-country variation in labor productivity largely by
appealing to variations in technologies, the two readily observable
about 0.03 or 0.04. In addition, growth in income per capita has averaged 1.7
percent per year in the United States and 2.2 percent per year in our intermediate
sample; this suggests that g is about 0.02.

THE EMPIRICS OF ECONOMIC GROWTH

415

variables on which the Solow model focuses in fact account for
most of the variation in income per capita.
Nonetheless, the model is not completely successful. In particular, the estimated impacts of saving and labor force growth are
much larger than the model predicts. The value of a. implied by the
coefficients should equal capital's share in income, which is roughly
one third. The estimates, however, imply an a that is much higher.
For example, the a implied by the coefficient in the constrained
regression for the intermediate sample is 0.59 (with a standard
error of 0.02). Thus, the data strongly contradict the prediction
that a = 1/3.
Because the estimates imply such a high capital share, it is
inappropriate to conclude that the Solow model is successful just
because the regressions in Table I can explain a high fraction of the
variation in income. For the intermediate sample, for instance,
when we employ the "growth-accounting" approach described
above and constrain the coefficients to be consistent with an a of
one third, the adjusted R2 falls from 0.59 to 0.28. Although the
excellent fit of the simple regressions in Table I is promising for the
implies that theories based on
theory of growth in general-it
be
able to account for most of the
observable
variables
may
easily
cross-country variation in real income it is not supportive of the
textbook Solow model in particular.

II. ADDING HUMAN-CAPITALACCUMULATIONTO THE SOLOWMODEL
Economists have long stressed the importance of human
capital to the process of growth. One might expect that ignoring
human capital would lead to incorrect conclusions: Kendrick
[1976] estimates that over half of the total U. S. capital stock in
1969 was human capital. In this section we explore the effect of
adding human-capital accumulation to the Solow growth model.
Including human capital can potentially alter either the
theoretical modeling or the empirical analysis of economic growth.
At the theoretical level, properly accounting for human capital may
change one's view of the nature of the growth process. Lucas
[1988], for example, assumes that although there are decreasing
returns to physical-capital accumulation when human capital is
held constant, the returns to all reproducible capital (human plus
physical) are constant. We discuss this possibility in Section III.
At the empirical level, the existence of human capital can alter
the analysis of cross-country differences; in the regressions in

416

QUARTERLYJOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

Table I human capital is an omitted variable. It is this empirical
problem that we pursue in this section. We first expand the Solow
model of Section I to include human capital. We show how leaving
out human capital affects the coefficients on physical capital
investment and population growth. We then run regressions
analogous to those in Table I to see whether proxies for human
capital can resolve the anomalies found in the first section.7
A. The Model
Let the production function be
(8)

Y(t) = K(t)H(t)P(A(t)L(t))1-a-,

where H is the stock of human capital, and all other variables are
defined as before. Let Sk be the fraction of income invested in
physical capital and Sh the fraction invested in human capital. The
evolution of the economy is determined by

(9a)
(9b)

k(t) = sky(t) - (n + g + 8)k(t),
h(t) = Shy(t) - (n + g + 8)h(t),

where y = Y/AL, k = K/AL, and h = H/AL are quantities per
effective unit of labor. We are assuming that the same production
function applies to human capital, physical capital, and consumption. In other words, one unit of consumption can be transformed
costlessly into either one unit of physical capital or one unit of
human capital. In addition, we are assuming that human capital
depreciates at the same rate as physical capital. Lucas [1988]
models the production function for human capital as fundamentally different from that for other goods. We believe that, at least
for an initial examination, it is natural to assume that the two
types of production functions are similar.
We assume that a + ,B < 1, which implies that there are
decreasing returns to all capital. (If a + ,B= 1, then there are
constant returns to scale in the reproducible factors. In this case,
7. Previous authors have provided evidence of the importance of human capital
for growth in income. Azariadis and Drazen [1990] find that no country was able to
grow quickly during the postwar period without a highly literate labor force. They
interpret this as evidence that there is a threshold externality associated with
human capital accumulation. Similarly, Rauch [1988] finds that among countries
that had achieved 95 percent adult literacy in 1960, there was a strong tendency for
income per capita to converge over the period 1950-1985. Romer [1989b] finds that
literacy in 1960 helps explain subsequent investment and that, if one corrects for
measurement error, literacy has no impact on growth beyond its effect on
investment. There is also older work stressing the role of human capital in
development; for example, see Krueger [1968] and Easterlin [1981].

THE EMPIRICS OF ECONOMIC GROWTH

417

there is no steady state for this model. We discuss this possibility in
Section III.) Equations (9a) and (9b) imply that the economy
converges to a steady state defined by

\n + g +

(10)
a

(*

k-S

,

n +g+

a

1/(1-a-)

/

Substituting (10) into the production function and taking logs
gives an equation for income per capita similar to equation (6)
above:
(1 1) In [L(t)|
Y(t)]_

In A(O) + gt +

+

(I ln(n + g + a
Iln(Sk) +

In(Sh)

This equation shows how income per capita depends on population
growth and accumulation of physical and human capital.
Like the textbook Solow model, the augmented model predicts
coefficients in equation (11) that are functions of the factor shares.
As before, a is physical capital's share of income, so we expect a
value of a of about one third. Gauging a reasonable value of P,
human capital's share, is more difficult. In the United States the
minimum wage-roughly
the return to labor without human
capital-has averaged about 30 to 50 percent of the average wage
in manufacturing. This fact suggests that 50 to 70 percent of total
labor income represents the return to human capital, or that ,Bis
between one third and one half.
Equation (11) makes two predictions about the regressions
run in Section I, in which human capital was ignored. First, even if
In (Sh) is independent of the other right-hand side variables, the
coefficient on ln(sk) is greater than a/(1 - a). For example, if a =
P = 1/3, then the coefficient on ln(sk) would be 1. Because higher
saving leads to higher income, it leads to a higher steady-state level
of human capital, even if the percentage of income devoted to
human-capital accumulation is unchanged. Hence, the presence of
human-capital accumulation increases the impact of physicalcapital accumulation on income.
Second, the coefficient on ln(n + g + 8) is larger in absolute

418

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

value than the coefficient on ln(sk). If a =P

= 1/3, for example, the

coefficient on ln(n + g + 8) would be -2. In this model high
population growth lowers income per capita because the amounts
of both physical and human capital must be spread more thinly
over the population.
There is an alternative way to express the role of human
capital in determining income in this model. Combining (11) with
the equation for the steady-state level of human capital given in
(10) yields an equation for income as a function of the rate of
investment in physical capital, the rate of population growth, and
the level of human capital:

(12) In [L(t) = InA(O) + gt + 1 _
aLWi

1 -a

ln(sk)

n(n + g + 8) +

-

ln(h*).

Equation (12) is almost identical to equation (6) in Section I. In
that model the level of human capital is a component of the error
term. Because the saving and population growth rates influence
h *, one should expect human capital to be positively correlated
with the saving rate and negatively correlated with population
growth. Therefore, omitting the human-capital term biases the
coefficients on saving and population growth.
The model with human capital suggests two possible ways to
modify our previous regressions. One way is to estimate the
augmented model's reduced form, that is, equation (11), in which
the rate of human-capital accumulation ln(sh) is added to the
right-hand side. The second way is to estimate equation (12), in
which the level of human capital In (h *) is added to the right-hand
side. Notice that these alternative regressions predict different
coefficients on the saving and population growth terms. When
testing the augmented Solow model, a primary question is whether
the available data on human capital correspond more closely to the
rate of accumulation (Sh) or to the level of human capital (h).
B. Data
To implement the model, we restrict our focus to humancapital investment in the form of education-thus ignoring investment in health, among other things. Despite this narrowed focus,
measurement of human capital presents great practical difficulties.
Most important, a large part of investment in education takes the

THE EMPIRICS OF ECONOMICGROWTH

419

form of forgone labor earnings on the part of students.8 This
problem is difficult to overcome because forgone earnings vary with
the level of human-capital investment: a worker with little human
capital forgoes a low wage in order to accumulate more human
capital, whereas a worker with much human capital forgoes a
higher wage. In addition, explicit spending on education takes place
at all levels of government as well as by the family, which makes
spending on education hard to measure. Finally, not all spending
on education is intended to yield productive human capital:
philosophy, religion, and literature, for example, although serving
in part to train the mind, might also be a form of consumption.9
We use a proxy for the rate of human-capital accumulation (Sh)
that measures approximately the percentage of the working-age
population that is in secondary school. We begin with data on the
fraction of the eligible population (aged 12 to 17) enrolled in
secondary school, which we obtained from the UNESCO yearbook.
We then multiply this enrollment rate by the fraction of the
working-age population that is of school age (aged 15 to 19). This
variable, which we call SCHOOL, is clearly imperfect: the age
ranges in the two data series are not exactly the same, the variable
does not include the input of teachers, and it completely ignores
primary and higher education. Yet if SCHOOL is proportional to Sh,
then we can use it to estimate equation (11); the factor of
proportionality will affect only the constant term.10
This measure indicates that investment in physical capital and
population growth may be proxying for human-capital accumulation in the regressions in Table I. The correlation between SCHOOL
8. Kendrick [19761 calculates that for the United States in 1969 total gross
investment in education and training was $192.3 billion, of which $92.3 billion took
the form of imputed compensation to students (tables A-1 and B-2).
9. An additional problem with implementing the augmented model is that
"output" in the model is not the same as that measured in the national income
accounts. Much of the expenditure on human capital is forgone wages, and these
forgone wages should be included in Y. Yet measured GDP fails to include this
component of investment spending.
Back-of-the-envelope calculations suggest that this problem is not quantitatively important, however. If human capital accumulation is completely unmeasured, then measured GDP is (1 - Sh)y. One can show that this measurement
problem does not affect the elasticity of GDP with respect to physical investment or
population growth. The elasticity of measured GDP with respect to human capital
accumulation is reduced by Shl(l - Sh) compared with the elasticity of true GDP
with respect to human capital accumulation. Because the fraction of a nation's
resources devoted to human capital accumulation is small, this effect is small. For
example, if a = P = 1/3 and Sh = 0.1, then the elasticity will be 0.9 rather than 1.0.
10. Even under the weaker assumption that ln(sh) is linear in In (SCHOOL),
we can use the estimated coefficients on ln(sk) and In (n + g + 5) to infer values of a
and P; in this case, the estimated coefficient on In (SCHOOL) will not have an
interpretation.

QUARTERLYJOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

420

and I/GDP is 0.59 for the intermediate sample, and the correlation
between SCHOOL and the population growth rate is -0.38. Thus,
including human-capital accumulation could alter substantially
the estimated impact of physical-capital accumulation and population growth on income per capita.
C. Results
Table II presents regressions of the log of income per capita on
the log of the investment rate, the log of n + g + 8, and the log of
the percentage of the population in secondary school. The humancapital measure enters significantly in all three samples. It also

TABLE II
OF THEAUGMENTED
SOLOWMODEL
ESTIMATION
Dependent variable: log GDP per working-age person in 1985
Sample:
Observations:
CONSTANT
ln(I/GDP)
ln(n + g +5)
ln(SCHOOL)
R2
s.e.e.
Restricted regression:
CONSTANT
ln(I/GDP) - ln(n + g + 5)
ln(SCHOOL) - ln(n + g + 5)
R2
s.e.e.
Test of restriction:
p-value
Implied a
Implied ,

Non-oil
98
6.89
(1.17)
0.69
(0.13)
-1.73
(0.41)
0.66
(0.07)
0.78
0.51

Intermediate
75
7.81
(1.19)
0.70
(0.15)
-1.50
(0.40)
0.73
(0.10)
0.77
0.45

OECD
22
8.63
(2.19)
0.28
(0.39)
-1.07
(0.75)
0.76
(0.29)
0.24
0.33

7.86
(0.14)
0.73
(0.12)
0.67
(0.07)
0.78
0.51

7.97
(0.15)
0.71
(0.14)
0.74
(0.09)
0.77
0.45

8.71
(0.47)
0.29
(0.33)
0.76
(0.28)
0.28
0.32

0.41
0.31
(0.04)
0.28
(0.03)

0.89
0.29
(0.05)
0.30
(0.04)

0.97
0.14
(0.15)
0.37
(0.12)

Note. Standard errors are in parentheses. The investment and population growth rates are averages for the
period 1960-1985. (g + 8) is assumed to be 0.05. SCHOOL is the average percentage of the working-age
population in secondary school for the period 1960-1985.

THE EMPIRICS OF ECONOMICGROWTH

421

greatly reduces the size of the coefficient on physical capital
investment and improves the fit of the regression compared with
Table I. These three variables explain almost 80 percent of the
cross-country variation in income per capita in the non-oil and
intermediate samples.
The results in Table II strongly support the augmented Solow
model. Equation (11) shows that the augmented model predicts
that the coefficients on In (IIY), In (SCHOOL), and In (n + g + 8)
sum to zero. The bottom half of Table II shows that, for all three
samples, this restriction is not rejected. The last lines of the table
give the values of a and ,B implied by the coefficients in the
restricted regression. For non-oil and intermediate samples, a and
,Bare about one third and highly significant. The estimates for the
OECD alone are less precise. In this sample the coefficients on
investment and population growth are not statistically significant;
but they are also not significantly different from the estimates
obtained in the larger samples.'1
We conclude that adding human capital to the Solow model
improves its performance. Allowing for human capital eliminates
the worrisome anomalies-the high coefficients on investment and
on population growth in our Table I regressions-that
arise when
the textbook Solow model is confronted with the data. The
parameter estimates seem reasonable. And even using an imprecise
proxy for human capital, we are able to dispose of a fairly large part
of the model's residual variance.

III. ENDOGENOUSGROWTHAND CONVERGENCE
Over the past few years economists studying growth have
turned increasingly to endogenous-growth models. These models
are characterized by the assumption of nondecreasing returns to
the set of reproducible factors of production. For example, our
model with physical and human capital would become an endogenous-growth model if a + ,B = 1. Among the implications of this
assumption are that countries that save more grow faster indefinitely and that countries need not converge in income per capita,
even if they have the same preferences and technology.
11. As we described in the previous footnote, under the weaker assumption
that ln(sh) is linear in In (SCHOOL), estimates of a and , can be inferred from the
coefficients on ln(I/GDP) and ln(n + g + 5) in the unrestricted regression. When we
do this, we obtain estimates of a and , little different from those reported in
Table II.

422

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

Advocates of endogenous-growth models present them as
alternatives to the Solow model and motivate them by an alleged
empirical failure of the Solow model to explain cross-country
differences. Barro [1989] presents the argument succinctly:
In neoclassical growth models with diminishing returns, such as Solow (1956), Cass
(1965) and Koopmans (1965), a country's per capita growth rate tends to be
inversely related to its starting level of income per person. Therefore, in the absence
of shocks, poor and rich countries would tend to converge in terms of levels of per
capita income. However, this convergence hypothesis seems to be inconsistent with
the cross-country evidence, which indicates that per capita growth rates are
uncorrelated with the starting level of per capita product.

Our first goal in this section is to reexamine this evidence on
convergence to assess whether it contradicts the Solow model.
Our second goal is to generalize our previous results. To
implement the Solow model, we have been assuming that countries
in 1985 were in their steady states (or, more generally, that the
deviations from steady state were random). Yet this assumption is
questionable. We therefore examine the predictions of the augmented Solow model for behavior out of the steady state.
A. Theory
The Solow model predicts that countries reach different steady
states. In Section II we argued that much of the cross-country
differences in income per capita can be traced to differing determinants of the steady state in the Solow growth model: accumulation
of human and physical capital and population growth. Thus, the
Solow model does not predict convergence; it predicts only that
income per capita in a given country converges to that country's
steady-state value. In other words, the Solow model predicts
convergence only after controlling for the determinants of the
steady state, a phenomenon that might be called "conditional
convergence."
In addition, the Solow model makes quantitative predictions
about the speed of convergence to steady state. Let y * be the
steady-state level of income per effective worker given by equation
(11), and let y(t) be the actual value at time t. Approximating
around the steady state, the speed of convergence is given by
(13)

d ln(y(t))
dt
=
X[ln(y*) -ln(y(t))],

where
A = (n + g + a) (1-a

-

THE EMPIRICS OF ECONOMIC GROWTH

423

For example, if a = P = 1/3 and n + g + 8 = 0.06, then the
convergence rate (A) would equal 0.02. This implies that the
economy moves halfway to steady state in about 35 years. Notice
that the textbook Solow model, which excludes human capital,
implies much faster convergence. If IB= 0, then X becomes 0.04,
and the economy moves halfway to steady state in about seventeen
years.
The model suggests a natural regression to study the rate of
convergence. Equation (13) implies that
ln(y(t)) = (1 - e-At) ln(y*) + e-Atln(y(0)),

(14)

where y(O) is income per effective worker at some initial date.
Subtracting In (y(O)) from both sides,
(15)

ln(y(t)) - ln(y(0)) = (1 - e-t) ln(y*) - (1 - e-At) ln(y(0)).

Finally, substituting for y*:
(16)

ln(y(t)) - ln(y(0)) = (1 - e-t)
+ (1 - e-t)

-

(1 - eAxt) _

ln(sk)
ln(sh)

_ lIn(n + g + 8) - (1 - e-t) ln(y(0)).

Thus, in the Solow model the growth of income is a function of the
determinants of the ultimate steady state and the initial level of
income.
Endogenous-growth models make predictions very different
from the Solow model regarding convergence among countries. In
endogenous-growth models there is no steady-state level of income;
differences among countries in income per capita can persist
indefinitely, even if the countries have the same saving and
population growth rates.12 Endogenous-growth models with a
12. Although we do not explore the issue here, endogenous-growth models also
make quantitative predictions about the impact of saving on growth. The models are
typically characterized by constant returns to reproducible factors of production,
namely physical and human capital. Our model of Section II with a + , = 1 and g =
0 provides a simple way of analyzing the predictions of models of endogenous
growth. With these modifications to the model of Section II, the production function
is Y = AKaH1-a. In this form the model predicts that the ratio of physical to human
capital, K/H, will converge to SkiSh, and that K, H, and Y will then all grow at rate
The derivative of this "steady-state" growth rate with respect to Sk is
A(Sk)a(Sh )'-a.
then aA(ShlSk) 1- = atI(KIY). The impact of saving on growth depends on the

424

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

with the "Y = AK" production functionsingle sector-those
predict no convergence of any sort. That is, these simple endogenous-growth models predict a coefficient of zero on y(O) in the
regression in (16). As Barro [1989] notes, however, endogenousgrowth models with more than one sector may imply convergence if
the initial income of a country is correlated with the degree of
imbalance among sectors.
Before presenting the results on convergence, we should note
the differences between regressions based on equation (16) and
those we presented earlier. The regressions in Tables I and II are
valid only if countries are in their steady states or if deviations
from steady state are random. Equation (16) has the advantage of
explicitly taking into account out-of-steady-state dynamics. Yet,
implementing equation (16) introduces a new problem. If countries
have permanent differences in their production functions-that is,
different A (O)'s-then these A(O)'s would enter as part of the error
term and would be positively correlated with initial income. Hence,
variation inA (0) would bias the coefficient on initial income toward
zero (and would potentially influence the other coefficients as well).
In other words, permanent cross-country differences in the production function would lead to differences in initial incomes uncorrelated with subsequent growth rates and, therefore, would bias the
results against finding convergence.
B. Results
We now test the convergence predictions of the Solow model.
We report regressions of the change in the log of income per capita
over the period 1960 to 1985 on the log of income per capita in
1960, with and without controlling for investment, growth of the
working-age population, and school enrollment.
In Table III the log of income per capita appears alone on the
right-hand side. This table reproduces the results of many previous
authors on the failure of incomes to converge [De Long 1988;
Romer 1987]. The coefficient on the initial level of income per
capita is slightly positive for the non-oil sample and zero for the
intermediate sample, and for both regressions the adjusted R2 is
exponent on capital in the production function, a, and the capital-output ratio. In
models in which endogenous growth arises mainly from externalities from physical
capital, a is close to one, and the derivative of the growth rate with respect to Sk is
approximately 1 I(KI Y), or about 0.4. In models in which endogenous growth arises
largely from human capital accumulation and there are no externalities from
physical capital, the derivative would be about 0.31(KIY), or about 0.12.

425

THE EMPIRICS OF ECONOMIC GROWTH
TABLE III
TESTS FOR UNCONDITIONALCONVERGENCE

Dependent variable: log difference GDP per working-age person 1960-1985
Sample:
Observations:
CONSTANT
ln(Y60)
R2

s.e.e.
Implied X

Non-oil
98
-0.266
(0.380)
0.0943
(0.0496)
0.03
0.44
-0.00360
(0.00219)

Intermediate
75
0.587
(0.433)
-0.00423
(0.05484)
-0.01
0.41
0.00017
(0.00218)

OECD
22
3.69
(0.68)
-0.341
(0.079)
0.46
0.18
0.0167
(0.0023)

Note. Standard errors are in parentheses. Y60 is GDP per working-age person in 1960.

essentially zero. There is no tendency for poor countries to grow
faster on average than rich countries.
Table III does show, however, that there is a significant
tendency toward convergence in the OECD sample. The coefficient
on the initial level of income per capita is significantly negative, and
the adjusted R2 of the regression is 0.46. This result confirms the
findings of Dowrick and Nguyen [1989], among others.
Table IV adds our measures of the rates of investment and
population growth to the right-hand side of the regression. In all
three samples the coefficient on the initial level of income is now
significantly negative; that is, there is strong evidence of convergence. Moreover, the inclusion of investment and population
growth rates improves substantially the fit of the regression. Table
V adds our measure of human capital to the right-hand side of the
regression in Table IV. This new variable further lowers the
coefficient on the initial level of income, and it again improves the
fit of the regression.
Figure I presents a graphical demonstration of the effect of
adding measures of population growth and accumulation of human
and physical capital to the usual "convergence picture," first
presented by Romer [1987]. The top panel presents a scatterplot
for our intermediate sample of the average annual growth rate of
income per capita from 1960 to 1985 against the log of income per
capita in 1960. Clearly, there is no evidence that countries that
start off poor tend to grow faster. The second panel of the figure

426

QUARTERLYJOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
TABLE IV
TESTS FOR CONDITIONALCONVERGENCE

Dependent variable: log difference GDP per working-age person 1960-1985
Sample:
Observations:
CONSTANT
ln(Y60)
ln(I/GDP)
ln(n + g + 8)
R72
s.e.e.
Implied X

Non-oil
98
1.93
(0.83)
-0.141
(0.052)
0.647
(0.087)
-0.299
(0.304)
0.38
0.35
0.00606
(0.00182)

Intermediate
75
2.23
(0.86)
-0.228
(0.057)
0.644
(0.104)
-0.464
(0.307)
0.35
0.33
0.0104
(0.0019)

OECD
22
2.19
(1.17)
-0.351
(0.066)
0.392
(0.176)
-0.753
(0.341)
0.62
0.15
0.0173
(0.0019)

Note. Standard errors are in parentheses. Y60 is GDP per working-age person in 1960. The investment and
population growth rates are averages for the period 1960-1985. (g + 8) is assumed to be 0.05.

TABLE V
TESTS FOR CONDITIONAL CONVERGENCE

Dependent variable: log difference GDP per working-age person 1960-1985
Sample:
Observations:
CONSTANT
ln(Y60)
ln(I/GDP)
ln(n + g + 8)
ln(SCHOOL)
R2
s.e.e.
Implied X

Non-oil
98
3.04
(0.83)
-0.289
(0.062)
0.524
(0.087)
-0.505
(0.288)
0.233
(0.060)
0.46
0.33
0.0137
(0.0019)

Intermediate
75
3.69
(0.91)
-0.366
(0.067)
0.538
(0.102)
-0.551
(0.288)
0.271
(0.081)
0.43
0.30
0.0182
(0.0020)

OECD
22
2.81
(1.19)
-0.398
(0.070)
0.335
(0.174)
-0.844
(0.334)
0.223
(0.144)
0.65
0.15
0.0203
(0.0020)

Note. Standard errors are in parentheses. Y60 is GDP per working-age person in 1960. The investment and
population growth rates are averages for the period 1960-1985. (g + 8) is assumed to be 0.05. SCHOOL is the
average percentage of the working-age population in secondary school for the period 1960-1985.

THE EMPIRICS OF ECONOMICGROWTH

A.

Unconditional
0

co 66
(0
Q) 4
--

427

~~00

22

-~0

0 0

00

Oo
0O

0
~~~~~0

o

0

R

?

0

o

0

0

00 Oo0

6,5

7,5

0

0

? -2
5,5

s

8,5

9.5

10.5

Log output per working age adult:1960
B.

Conditionalon saving and populationgrowth

~~
~~0 0
0
0
o0c~
O? ???0 08 8

6

060

W, 4 _CP
=

2

o

020

0

o

D

0

0

5s,5

6.5

7, 5

8.5

9.5

10,5

Log output per working age adult:1960
LO

C.Conditionalon saving, populationgrowthand humancapital
6
0~~~~~~

0

?
2 0~~~~~~

?
w

?

O??b 9

6.5

7.5

0

lb8

-2
5.5

8.5

9.5

Log output per working age adult:1960
FIGUREI

Unconditional
versusConditional
Convergence

10.5

428

QUARTERLYJOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

partials out the logs of the investment rate and (n + g + 5) from
both the income level and growth rate variables. This figure shows
that if countries did not vary in their investment and population
growth rates, there would be a strong tendency for poor countries
to grow faster than rich ones. The third panel of Figure I partials
out our human-capital variable in addition to investment and
population growth rates; the tendency toward convergence is now
even stronger.
The results in Tables IV and V are notable not only for the
finding of convergence, but also for the rate at which convergence
occurs. The implied values of X, the parameter governing the speed
of convergence, are derived from the coefficient on In (Y60). The
values in Table IV are much smaller than the textbook Solow
model predicts. Yet the estimates in Table V are closer to what the
augmented Solow model predicts, for two reasons. First, the
augmented model predicts a slower rate of convergence than the
model without human capital. Second, the empirical results including human capital imply a faster rate of convergence than the
empirical results without human capital. Hence, once again, the
inclusion of human capital can help explain some results that
appear anomalous from the vantage point of the textbook Solow
model.
Table VI presents estimates of equation (16) imposing the
restriction that the coefficients on ln(sk), ln(sh), and ln(n + g + 5)
sum to zero. We find that this restriction is not rejected and that
imposing it has little effect on the coefficients. The last lines in
Table VI present the implied values of a and ,. The estimates of a
range from 0.38 to 0.48, and the estimates of ,Bare 0.23 in all three
samples. Compared with the results in Table II, these regressions
give a somewhat larger weight to physical capital and a somewhat
smaller weight to human capital.
In contrast to the results in Tables I through IV, the results for
the OECD sample in Tables V and VI are similar to those for the
other samples. An interpretation that reconciles the similarity
across samples here and the dissimilarity in the earlier specifications is that departures from steady state represent a larger share
of cross-country variation in income per capita for the OECD than
for the broader samples. If the OECD countries are far from their
steady states, then population growth and capital accumulation
have not yet had their full impact on standards of living; hence, we
obtain lower estimated coefficients and lower R 2's for the OECD in

429

THE EMPIRICS OF ECONOMICGROWTH
TABLEVI
TESTS FOR CONDITIONAL CONVERGENCE,

RESTRICTED REGRESSION

Dependentvariable:log differenceGDP per working-ageperson 1960-1985
Sample:
Observations:
CONSTANT
ln(Y60)
ln(I/GDP) - ln(n + g + 5)

Non-oil
98
2.46
(0.48)
-0.299
(0.061)

Intermediate
75
3.09
(0.53)
-0.372
(0.067)

OECD
22
3.55
(0.63)
-0.402
(0.069)

0.500

0.506

0.396

(0.082)

(0.095)

(0.152)

ln(SCHOOL) - ln(n + g + 5)

0.238

0.266

0.236

R2
s.e.e.

(0.060)
0.46
0.33

(0.080)
0.44
0.30

(0.141)
0.66
0.15

0.40
0.0142
(0.0019)
0.48
(0.07)
0.23
(0.05)

0.42
0.0186
(0.0019)
0.44
(0.07)
0.23
(0.06)

0.47
0.0206
(0.0020)
0.38
(0.13)
0.23
(0.11)

Test of restriction:
p-value
ImpliedX
Implied(x
Implied 13

Note. Standard errors are in parentheses. Y60 is GDP per working-age person in 1960. The investment and
population growth rates are averages for the period 1960-1985. (g + 5) is assumed to be 0.05. SCHOOL is the
average percentage of the working-age population in secondary school for the period 1960-1985.

specifications that do not consider out-of-steady-state dynamics.
Similarly, the greater importance of departures from steady state
for the OECD would explain the finding of greater unconditional
convergence. We find this interpretation plausible: World War II
surely caused large departures from the steady state, and it surely
had larger effects on the OECD than on the rest of the world. With
a value of X of 0.02, almost half of the departure from steady state
in 1945 would have remained by the end of our sample in 1985.
Overall, our interpretation of the evidence on convergence
contrasts sharply with that of endogenous-growth advocates. In
particular, we believe that the study of convergence does not show
a failure of the Solow model. After controlling for those variables
that the Solow model says determine the steady state, there is
substantial convergence in income per capita. Moreover, convergence occurs at approximately the rate that the model predicts.

430

QUARTERLYJOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

IV. INTEREST RATE DIFFERENTIALS AND CAPITAL MOVEMENTS

Recently, several economists, including Lucas [1988], Barro
[1989], and King and Rebelo [1989], have emphasized an objection
to the Solow model in addition to those we have addressed so far:
they argue that the model fails to explain either rate-of-return
differences or international capital flows. In the models of Sections
I and II, the steady-state marginal product of capital, net of
depreciation, is
(17)

MPK- 8 = u(n+ g + 8Sk

Thus, the marginal product of capital varies positively with the
population growth rate and negatively with the saving rate.
Because the cross-country differences in saving and population
growth rates are large, the differences in rates of return should also
be large. For example, if at = 1/3, 8 = 0.03, and g = 0.02, then the
mean of the steady-state net marginal product is 0.12 in the
intermediate sample, and the standard deviation is 0.08.13
Two related facts seem inconsistent with these predictions.
First, observed differentials in real interest rates appear smaller
than the predicted differences in the net marginal product of
capital. Second, as Feldstein and Horioka [1980] first documented,
countries with high saving rates have high rates of domestic
investment rather than large current account surpluses: capital
does not flow from high-saving countries to low-saving countries.
Although these two facts indeed present puzzles to be resolved,
it is premature to view them as a basis for rejecting the Solow
model. The Solow model predicts that the marginal product of
capital will be high in low-saving countries, but it does not
necessarily predict that real interest rates will also be high. One
can infer the marginal product of capital from real interest rates on
financial assets only if investors are optimizing and capital markets
are perfect. Both of these assumptions are questionable. It is
13. There is an alternative way of obtaining the marginal product of capital,
which applies even outside of the steady state but requires an estimate of I and the
assumption of no country-specific shifts to the production function. If one assumes
that the returns on human and physical capital are equalized within each country,
then one can show that the MPK is proportional toy(a+P-1)/(a+P). Therefore, for the
textbook Solow model in which a = 1/3and I = 0, the MPK is inversely proportional
to the square of output. As King and Rebelo [1989] and others have noted, the
implied differences in rates of return across countries are incredibly large. Yet if a =
0 = 1/3, then the MPK is inversely proportional to the square root of output. In this
case, the implied cross-country differences in the MPK are much smaller and are
similar to those obtained with equation (17).

THE EMPIRICS OF ECONOMIC GROWTH

431

possible that some of the most productive investments in poor
countries are in public capital, and that the behavior of the
governments of poor countries is not socially optimal. In addition,
it is possible that the marginal product of private capital is also
high in poor countries, yet those economic agents who could make
the productive investments do not do so because they face financing constraints or because they fear future expropriation.
Some evidence for this interpretation comes from examining
international variation in the rate of profit. If capital earns its
marginal product, then one can measure the marginal product of
capital as

MPK=Ky
That is, the return to capital equals capital's share in income (a)
divided by the capital-output ratio (K/Y). The available evidence
indicates that capital's share is roughly constant across counties.
Sachs [1979, Table 3] presents factor shares for the G-7 countries.
His figures show that variation in these shares across countries
and over time is small.'4 By contrast, capital-output ratios vary
substantially across countries: accumulating the investment data
from Summers and Heston [1988] to produce estimates of the
capital stock, one finds that low-saving countries have capitaloutput ratios near one and high-saving countries have capitaloutput ratios near three. Thus, direct measurement of the profit
rate suggests that there is large international variation in the
return to capital.
The available evidence also indicates that expropriation risk is
one reason that capital does not move to eliminate these differences
in the profit rate. Williams [1975] examines the experience of
foreign investment in developing countries from 1956 to 1972. He
reports that, during this period, governments nationalized about
19 percent of foreign capital, and that compensation averaged
about 41 percent of book value. It is hard to say precisely how much
of the observed differences in profit rates this expropriation risk
can explain. Yet, in view of this risk, it would be surprising if the

14. In particular, there is no evidence that rapid capital accumulation raises
capital's share. Sachs [1979] reports that Japan's rapid accumulation in the 1960s
and 1970s, for example, was associated with a rise in labor's share from 69 percent
in 1962-1964 to 77 percent in 1975-1978. See also Atkinson [1975, p. 167].

432

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

profit rates were not at least somewhat higher in developing
countries.
Further evidence on rates of return comes from the large
literature on international differences in the return to education.
Psacharopoulos [1985] summarizes the results of studies for over
60 countries that analyze the determinants of labor earnings using
micro data. Because forgone wages are the primary cost of education, the rate of return is roughly the percentage increase in the
wage resulting from an additional year of schooling. He reports
that the poorer the country, the larger the return to schooling.
Overall, the evidence on the return to capital appears consistent with the Solow model. Indeed, one might argue that it
supports the Solow model against the alternative of endogenousgrowth models. Many endogenous-growth models assume constant
returns to scale in the reproducible factors of production; they
therefore imply that the rate of return should not vary with the
level of development. Yet direct measurement of profit rates and
returns to schooling indicates that the rate of return is much
higher in poor countries.

CONCLUSION

We have suggested that international differences in income per
capita are best understood using an augmented Solow growth
model. In this model output is produced from physical capital,
human capital, and labor, and is used for investment in physical
capital, investment in human capital, and consumption. One
production function that is consistent with our empirical results is
Y= K1/3H1"31/3.
This model of economic growth has several implications. First,
the elasticity of income with respect to the stock of physical capital
is not substantially different from capital's share in income. This
conclusion indicates, in contrast to Romer's suggestion, that
capital receives approximately its social return. In other words,
there are not substantial externalities to the accumulation of
physical capital.
Second, despite the absence of externalities, the accumulation
of physical capital has a larger impact on income per capita than
the textbook Solow model implies. A higher saving rate leads to
higher income in steady state, which in turn leads to a higher level
of human capital, even if the rate of human-capital accumulation is

THE EMPIRICS OF ECONOMIC GROWTH

433

unchanged. Higher saving thus raises total factor productivity as it
is usually measured. This difference between the textbook model
and the augmented model is quantitatively important. The textbook Solow model with a capital share of one third indicates that
the elasticity of income with respect to the saving rate is one half.
Our augmented Solow model indicates that this elasticity is one.
Third, population growth also has a larger impact on income
per capita than the textbook model indicates. In the textbook model
higher population growth lowers income because the available
capital must be spread more thinly over the population of workers.
In the augmented model human capital also must be spread more
thinly, implying that higher population growth lowers measured
total factor productivity. Again, this effect is important quantitatively. In the textbook model with a capital share of one third, the
elasticity of income per capita with respect to n + g + 8 is - '/2. In
our augmented model this elasticity is -2.
Fourth, our model has implications for the dynamics of the
economy when the economy is not in steady state. In contrast to
endogenous-growth models, this model predicts that countries
with similar technologies and rates of accumulation and population
growth should converge in income per capita. Yet this convergence
occurs more slowly than the textbook Solow model suggests. The
textbook Solow model implies that the economy reaches halfway to
steady state in about 17 years, whereas our augmented Solow
model implies that the economy reaches halfway in about 35 years.
More generally, our results indicate that the Solow model is
consistent with the international evidence if one acknowledges the
importance of human as well as physical capital. The augmented
Solow model says that differences in saving, education, and population growth should explain cross-country differences in income per
capita. Our examination of the data indicates that these three
variables do explain most of the international variation.
Future research should be directed at explaining why the
variables taken to be exogenous in the Solow model vary so much
from country to country. We expect that differences in tax policies,
education policies, tastes for children, and political stability will
end up among the ultimate determinants of cross-country differences. We also expect that the Solow model will provide the best
framework for understanding how these determinants influence a
country's level of economic well-being.

434

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
APPENDIX

Sample

GDP/
adult

Growth
1960-1985

Number

Country

N I 0

1960

working
1985 GDP age pop

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43

Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
CentralAfr. Rep.
Chad
Congo, Peop. Rep.
Egypt
Ethiopia
Gabon
Gambia, The
Ghana
Guinea
Ivory Coast
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Somalia
S. Africa
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zaire
Zambia
Zimbabwe

1 1 0
1 0 0
1 0 0
1 1 0
1 0 0
1 0 0
1 1 0
1 0 0
1 0 0
1 0 0
1 0 0
1 1 0
0 0 0
0 0 0
1 0 0
0 0 0
1 1 0
1 1 0
0 0 0
1 0 0
1 1 0
1 1 0
1 1 0
1 0 0
1 0 0
1 1 0
1 0 0
1 0 0
1 1 0
1 0 0
1 1 0
1 0 0
1 0 0
1 1 0
1 0 0
0 0 0
1 1 0
1 0 0
1 1 0
1 0 0
1 0 0
1 1 0
1 1 0

2485
1588
1116
959
529
755
889
838
908
1009
907
533
1307
799
1009
746
1386
944
431
863
1194
455
737
777
1973
1030
1420
539
1055
460
1392
511
901
4768
1254
817
383
777
1623
601
594
1410
1187

4.8
4371
1171
0.8
2.2
1071
3671
8.6
2.9
857
1.2
663
5.7
2190
1.5
789
462 -0.9
6.2
2624
6.0
2160
2.8
608
5350
7.0
3.6
1.0
727
2.2
869
1704
5.1
1329
4.8
1483
6.8
944
3.3
1.4
975
4.8
823
2.1
710
1038
3.3
4.2
2967
5.8
2348
1.4
1035
4.4
841
2.8
1186
4.5
696
2.5
1450
3.4
805
1.8
657
3.9
7064
1.8
1038
7.2
5.3
710
3.4
978
5.6
3661
3.5
667
412
0.9
2.1
1217
5.1
2107

2.6
2.1
2.4
3.2
0.9
1.7
2.1
1.7
1.9
2.4
2.5
2.3
1.4
2.3
1.6
4.3
3.4
1.9
3.0
2.2
2.4
2.2
2.2
2.6
2.5
2.7
2.6
2.4
2.8
2.3
1.6
3.1
2.3
2.6
2.9
2.5
2.4
3.1
2.4
2.7
2.8

I/Y SCHOOL

24.1
5.8
10.8
28.3
12.7
5.1
12.8
10.5
6.9
28.8
16.3
5.4
22.1
18.1
9.1
10.9
12.4
17.4
12.6
21.5
7.1
13.2
7.3
25.6
17.1
8.3
6.1
10.3
12.0
7.9
9.6
10.9
13.8
21.6
13.2
17.7
18.0
15.5
13.8
4.1
6.5
31.7
21.1

4.5
1.8
1.8
2.9
0.4
0.4
3.4
1.4
0.4
3.8
7.0
1.1
2.6
1.5
4.7
2.3
2.4
2.0
2.5
2.6
0.6
1.0
1.0
7.3
3.6
0.7
0.5
2.3
0.4
1.7
1.7
1.1
3.0
2.0
3.7
0.5
2.9
4.3
1.1
3.6
2.4
4.4

435

THE EMPIRICS OF ECONOMICGROWTH
APPENDIX
(CONTINUED)

Sample

Number
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84

Country

N I 0

GDP/
adult

1960

Growth
1960-1985

I/Y SCHOOL

working
1985 GDP age pop

0 0 0 1224
Afghanistan
0 0 0
Bahrain
1 1 0
846 1221
Bangladesh
1 1 0
Burma
517 1031
1 1 0 3085 13,372
Hong Kong
India
1 1 0
978 1339
Iran
0 0 0 3606 7400
0 0 0 4916 5626
Iraq
1 1 0 4802 10,450
Israel
Japan
1 1 1 3493 13,893
1 1 0 2183 4312
Jordan
1 1 0 1285 4775
Korea, Rep. of
Kuwait
0 0 0 77,881 25,635
1 1 0 2154 5788
Malaysia
1 0 0
833
974
Nepal
Oman
0 0 0
15,584
Pakistan
1 1 0 1077 2175
1 1 0 1668 2430
Philippines
Saudi Arabia
0 0 0 6731 11,057
1 1 0 2793 14,678
Singapore
Sri Lanka
1 1 0 1794 2482
1 1 0 2382 6042
Syrian Arab Rep.
Taiwan
0 0 0
1 1 0 1308 3220
Thailand
U. Arab Emirates
0 0 0
18,513
Yemen
0 0 0
1918
Austria
1 1 1 5939 13,327
1 1 1 6789 14,290
Belgium
0 0 0 2948
Cyprus
1 1 1 8551 16,491
Denmark
Finland
1 1 1 6527 13,779
France
1 1 1 7215 15,027
Germany, Fed. Rep. 1 1 1 7695 15,297
1 1 1 2257 6868
Greece
0 0 0 8091
Iceland
1 1 1 4411 8675
Ireland
1 1 1 4913 11,082
Italy
0 0 0 9015
Luxembourg
0 0 0 2293
Malta
1 1 1 7689 13,177
Netherlands
1 1 1 7938 19,723
Norway

1.6
4.0
4.5
8.9
3.6
6.3
3.8
5.9
6.8
5.4
7.9
2.4
7.1
2.6
5.8
4.5
6.1
9.2
3.7
6.7
8.0
6.7

3.6
3.5
5.2
3.2
3.7
3.9
3.3
5.1
3.9
3.8
3.8
2.8
6.0
3.6
4.3

2.6
1.7
3.0
2.4
3.4
3.2
2.8
1.2
2.7
2.7
6.8
3.2
2.0
3.3
3.0
3.0
4.1
2.6
2.4
3.0
3.1
2.5
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
1.0
0.5
0.7
1.1
0.6

1.4
0.7

6.9
30.0
6.8
11.4
19.9
16.8
18.4
16.2
28.5
36.0
17.6
22.3
9.5
23.2
5.9
15.6
12.2
14.9
12.8
32.2
14.8
15.9
20.7
18.0
26.5
17.2
23.4
23.4
31.2
26.6
36.9
26.2
28.5
29.3
29.0
25.9
24.9
26.9
30.9
25.8
29.1

0.9
12.1
3.2
3.5
7.2
5.1
6.5
7.4
9.5
10.9
10.8
10.2
9.6
7.3
2.3
2.7
3.0
10.6
3.1
9.0
8.3
8.8
4.4
0.6
8.0
9.3
8.2
10.7
11.5
8.9
8.4
7.9
10.2
11.4
7.1
5.0
7.1
10.7
10.0

436

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
APPENDIX
(CONTINUED)

Sample

Number

Country

85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
120
121

Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
United Kingdom
Barbados
Canada
Costa Rica
Dominican Rep.
El Salvador
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Trinidad & Tobago
United States
Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Surinam
Uruguay
Venezuela
Australia
Fiji
Indonesia
New Zealand
Papua New Guinea

N I 0

GDPI
adult

1960

Growth
1960-1985

I/Y SCHOOL

working
1985 GDP age pop

1 1 1 2272 5827
1 1 1 3766 9903
1 1 1 7802 15,237
1 1 1 10,308 15,881
1 1 1 2274 4444
1 1 1 7634 13,331
0 0 0 3165
1 1 1 10,286 17,935
1 1 0 3360 4492
1 1 0 1939 3308
1 1 0 2042 1997
1 1 0 2481 3034
1 1 0 1096 1237
1 1 0 1430 1822
1 1 0 2726 3080
1 1 0 4229 7380
1 1 0 3195 3978
1 1 0 2423 5021
1 1 0 9253 11,285
1 1 1 12,362 18,988
1 1 0 4852 5533
1 1 0 1618 2055
1 1 0 1842 5563
1 1 0 5189 5533
1 1 0 2672 4405
1 1 0 2198 4504
0 0 0 2761
1 1 0 1951 3914
1 1 0 3310 3775
0 0 0 3226
1 1 0 5119 5495
1 1 0 10,367 6336
1 1 1 8440 13,409
0 0 0 3634
1 1 0
879 2159
1 1 1 9523 12,308
1 0 0 1781 2544

4.4
4.9
3.1
2.5
5.2
2.5
4.8
4.2
4.7
5.1
3.3
3.9
1.8
4.0
2.1
5.5
4.1
5.9
2.7
3.2
2.1
3.3
7.3
2.6
5.0
5.7
1.1
5.5
3.5
4.5
0.9
1.9
3.8
4.2
5.5
2.7
3.5

0.6
1.0
0.4
0.8
2.5
0.3
2.0
3.5
2.9
3.3
3.1
1.3
3.1
1.6
3.3
3.3
3.0
1.9
1.5
1.5
2.4
2.9
2.3
3.0
2.8
2.7
2.9
0.6
3.8
2.0
1.9
1.7
2.1

22.5
17.7
24.5
29.7
20.2
18.4
19.5
23.3
14.7
17.1
8.0
8.8
7.1
13.8
20.6
19.5
14.5
26.1
20.4
21.1
25.3
13.3
23.2
29.7
18.0
24.4
32.4
11.7
12.0
19.4
11.8
11.4
31.5
20.6
13.9
22.5
16.2

5.8
8.0
7.9
4.8
5.5
8.9
12.1
10.6
7.0
5.8
3.9
2.4
1.9
3.7
11.2
6.6
5.8
11.6
8.8
11.9
5.0
4.9
4.7
7.7
6.1
7.2
11.7
4.4
8.0
8.1
7.0
7.0
9.8
8.1
4.1
11.9
1.5

Note. Growth rates are in percent per year. IIY is investment as a percentage of GDP, and SCHOOL is the
percentage of the working-age population in secondary school, both averaged for the period 1960-1985. N, I, and
0 denote the non-oil, intermediate, and OECD samples.

THE EMPIRICS OF ECONOMICGROWTH

437

HARVARDUNIVERSITY
UNIVERSITYOF CALIFORNIAAT BERKELEY
BROWNUNIVERSITY

REFERENCES
Atkinson, Anthony, The Economics of Inequality (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1975).
Azariadis, Costas, and Allan Drazen, "Threshold Externalities in Economic
Development," Quarterly Journal of Economics, CV (1990), 501-26.
Barro, Robert J., "Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries," NBER
Working Paper 3120, September 1989.
De Long, J. Bradford, "Productivity Growth, Convergence, and Welfare: Comment,"
American Economic Review, LXXVIII (1988), 1138-54.
Dowrick, Steve, and Duc-Tho Nguyen, "OECD Comparative Economic Growth
1950-85: Catch-Up and Convergence," American Economic Review, LXXIX
(1989),1010-30.
Easterlin, Richard, "Why Isn't the Whole World Developed?" Journal of Economic
History, XLI (1981),1-20.
Feldstein, Martin, and Charles Horioka, "Domestic Saving and International
Capital Flows," Economic Journal, XC (1980), 314-29.
Kendrick, John W., The Formation and Stocks of Total Capital (New York:
Columbia University for NBER, 1976).
King, Robert G., and Sergio T. Rebelo, "Transitional Dynamics and Economic
Growth in the Neoclassical Model," NBER Working Paper 3185, November
1989.
Krueger, Anne O., "Factor Endowments and per Capita Income Differences Among
Countries," Economic Journal, LXXVIII (1968), 641-59.
Lucas, Robert E. Jr., "On the Mechanics of Economic Development," Journal of
Monetary Economics, XXII (1988), 3-42.
Psacharopoulos, George, "Returns to Education: A Further International Update
and Implications," Journal of Human Resources, XX (1985), 583-604.
Rauch, James E., "The Question of International Convergence of per Capita
Consumption: An Euler Equation Approach," mimeo, August 1988, University
of California at San Diego.
Romer, Paul, "Crazy Explanations for the Productivity Slowdown," NBER MacroeconomicsAnnual, 1987,163-210.
Capital Accumulation in the Theory of Long Run Growth," Modern
Business Cycle Theory, Robert J. Barro, ed. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1989a), pp. 51-127.
"Human Capital and Growth: Theory and Evidence," NBER Working Paper
3173, November 1989b.
Sachs, Jeffrey D., "Wages, Profit, and Macroeconomic Adjustment: A Comparative
Study," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (1979:2), 269-332.
Solow, Robert M., "A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth," Quarterly
Journal of Economics, LXX (1956), 65-94.
Summers, Robert, and Alan Heston, "A New Set of International Comparisons of
Real Product and Price Levels Estimates for 130 Countries, 1950-85," Review
of Income and Wealth, XXXIV (1988),1-26.
Williams, M. L., "The Extent and Significance of Nationalization of Foreign-owned
Assets in Developing Countries, 1956-1972," Oxford Economic Papers, XXVII
(1975), 260-73.

