mortgage lending. This incomplete migration towards shadow banks illustrates that tighter capital
regulations on the banking sector are not being completely absorbed through the shadow bank
migration channel. Thus, the notion that shadow banks might pick up the slack in bank lending
entirely is not correct.
Higher capital requirements primarily hurt banks and higher consumers in higher-income zip codes
where there is a greater demand for jumbo loans. Given the capital requirement of 9%, bank profits
decrease by roughly $24 billion, while shadow bank profits are essentially unchanged. As capital
requirements increase, banks lose their comparative advantage of financing loans on balance sheet.
Total consumer surplus declines by roughly $45 billion, and a typical borrower sees her consumer
surplus decline by roughly $1,617 under the 9% capital requirement scenario versus the baseline.
Welfare effects differ significantly within the income distribution, with the majority of these declines
occurring for borrowers in high-income markets that rely on jumbo lending. The top income quartile
markets see consumer surplus decline by roughly $32 billion, while consumer surplus in the bottom
income quartile markets declines by only $1 billion. The decline in consumer surplus occurs along
two margins: (i) the borrowers who still borrow jumbo loans now pay higher rates and (ii) the
borrowers who switched to conforming mortgages, or exited the market, now do not borrow the
optimal amount. Finally, it is important to note that these losses have to be weighed against possible
welfare gains of moving risk from bank balance sheets (e.g., Egan et al. 2017).
Bank Stability
There are two dimensions through which capital requirements affect bank stability: retaining
mortgage risk on bank balance sheets, and bank profits. Even a small reduction in capital requirements
results in a large increase in the share of loans retained on the bank balance sheets. Reducing capital
requirements to 4.5% expands the balance sheet holdings of mortgages by 54% (~$360 billion
annually). Conversely, the primary consequence of increasing capital requirements is a large decline
in on-balance-sheet lending. As capital requirements increase to 9% and balance sheet financing
becomes significantly more expensive, the share of balance-sheet financed lending drops from 37%
to 14%, and banks’ balance sheet holdings of mortgages drop by 63%. In other words, capital
requirements operate primarily on the balance sheet retention margin. These large adjustments starkly
illustrate the importance of the bank balance sheet retention margin in responding to increases in
capital requirements. This risk is instead shifted to GSEs and indirectly to taxpayers, who insure these
mortgages. Offsetting somewhat the decrease in risk is also a decrease in expected bank profits, which
decline with tighter capital requirements.
V.B Secondary Market Interventions: Quantitative Easing
Instead of targeting banks, financial intermediation policies can target secondary markets for loans.
One set of such major policies during the last financial crisis was referred to as quantitative easing
(QE). The Federal Reserve intervened in the securitization market by purchasing large amounts of
GSE-guaranteed mortgages, hoping to decrease the rates at which GSEs purchased mortgages from
originators, and, in turn, easing access to mortgages. Estimates suggest mortgage rates declined



                                                  30
