vice versa. Before the crisis, the aggregate data showed virtually no aggregate jumbo spread. As the
quantity of jumbo mortgages contracted towards 2009, their relative price increased by almost 40
basis points, and as much as 70 basis points in early 2009. As the market share of jumbo mortgages
recovered, the jumbo spread decreased by up to 60 basis points. The positive correlation between
aggregate price and quantity suggests that supply shocks may be partially responsible for driving the
aggregate trends. If the contraction in jumbo quantity was solely driven by demand for jumbos (e.g.,
due to a decline in house prices), we should also observe a decrease in the pricing of jumbo mortgages.
We next show that changes in the capitalization of the banking sector are a candidate source of these
supply shocks. Figure 1D illustrates that the banking sector capitalization originally declined,
bottoming out in 2009, and then began increasing. Figure 2A and 2B show that the series are in fact
related: there is a strong positive association between bank capitalization and quantity of jumbo
originations. Overall, these patterns suggest that as traditional bank capitalization declines, the
amount of on-balance sheet (jumbo) lending declines and their relative pricing increases. In other
words, these aggregate facts are consistent with the idea that a decline in the balance sheet capacity
of the banking sector serves as a supply shock to on-balance-sheet lending, at least relative to lending,
which can be securitized.
III.A.2 Shadow Bank Migration and Banks’ Business Model Adjustment
The jumbo and conforming market segments experienced large changes in their market structure,
which can be captured in two trends. The first trend is related to the migration of residential mortgage
origination activity to shadow banks. Prior work shows that during this period, 25 pp of market share
migrated to shadow banks (Buchak et al. 2018). Central to this paper, we show that the migration of
shadow banks did not take place in balance-sheet intensive jumbo lending. Bank market share in the
jumbo market has remained roughly constant, varying between 85% and 95%. This contrasts with the
conforming market, in which bank market share declined by over one third, from slightly under 80%
in 2007 to about 50% in 2016 (Figure 3A). In other words, the contraction and later expansion in the
amount of jumbo lending is mainly driven by changes in originations by traditional banks. The
changes in the conforming market, on the other hand, are driven by changes in both shadow and
traditional bank originations.
We next document that traditional banks adjusted their business models during this period. One
possible way to interpret the facts above is that traditional banks uniformly contracted their lending
across markets, but shadow banks chose to only expand in the conforming market. This was not the
case. Figure 3B shows that as banks’ capitalization decreased from 2007 to 2009, the share of jumbo
mortgages in their lending declined from 30% to 10%. As bank capitalization increased, they shifted
their originations back to on-balance-sheet lending with jumbo mortgages comprising more than 40%
of their originations by 2016. In other words, banks appear to adjust to capitalization and other
regulatory shocks by switching between the classic banking model (originating and retaining loans)
and the originate-to-distribute model (shadow bank model). We call this margin on which banks can
adjust the “balance sheet retention margin.”




                                                   9
