corresponds to roughly a 4.35% marginal cost. This implies a negative conforming-jumbo marginal
cost spread, which is roughly in line with patterns in Figure 1C.
Finally, the model suggests that originating refinancing mortgages is less costly than originating
mortgages for purchase by approximately 5–10 basis points. In refinancing, lenders benefit from
many on-the-ground activities having already taken place at the time of purchase, such as a title check,
structural examination, and negotiations between buyer and seller, which reduces costs.
IV.C.3 Bank Regulatory Burden and Fintech Quality
Table 8 shows two primary reasons why banks have been losing market share during the period from
2010 to 2015: an increase in the regulatory burden from 2012 onwards and the entrance of new fintech
competitors. Part of the reason why banks have lost market share during the period is an increase in
capital requirements, which has increased their costs of funding, as we discuss above. On the other
hand, the period following the crisis has been profitable, increasing banks’ capitalization and undoing
some of the capital requirement increases. Despite that, banks have lost substantial market share in
the conforming market. Table 8 explains these trends.
The regulatory burden measures the noncapital requirement-related regulatory constraints faced by
the banking sector relative to shadow banks, such as risk of enforcement actions and lawsuits, which
constrain bank origination. The estimates show that the banking sector regulatory burden even
declined a bit, but then started increasing from 2012 onwards. This is the period of implementation
of the Dodd-Frank Act, the establishment of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, and increased
mortgage lawsuit activity targeted at traditional banks. These results are consistent with those of
Buchak et al. (2018), who estimate the regulatory burden in a simpler model, but on a longer sample,
and show reduced-form evidence on the different aspects of the regulatory burden such as tougher
regulatory enforcement and lawsuits leveled against banks. The substantial changes in the regulatory
burden emphasize that the singular focus on capital requirements misses a large degree of regulatory
and enforcement changes in the banking sector following the crisis, which a model has to account for.
The second reason that banks have been losing market share over this period is the entrance of new
fintech lenders. These fintech lenders entered on the promise of providing a better user experience,
with a more consumer-convenient online interface. Table 8 suggests that it took fintech until 2013 to
achieve that, and they were only successful in the market for mortgage refinancing. Our post-2013
results are consistent with consumer survey evidence, which consistently measure high consumer
satisfaction associated with borrowing from Quicken Loans, the largest fintech lender. 15 The model
estimates suggest that fintech are at a disadvantage in the market for new originations, i.e., when the
borrower is purchasing a house. These borrowers on average prefer non-fintech shadow banks over
the whole sample, although by 2012 the disadvantage has decreased significantly. This result is
consistent with the idea that the online origination is not well-suited to originating new mortgages,
which require on-the-ground activities such as a structural examination (Stroebel 2016).



15
   https://www.jdpower.com/business/press-releases/2019-us-primary-mortgage-servicer-satisfaction-study [Retrieved
September 19, 2019].

                                                       27
