between 20–100 bps across different QE operations. 19 We model QE as a decrease in the GSE
financing costs, which was also the stated intent of the policy. To better understand the implications
of secondary market interventions, we also experiment with increasing GSE rates. Such an increase
could reflect the reversal of the QE policy or increase in the guarantee fees charged by the GSEs for
coverage of projected credit losses from defaults in the securitized pools. The results are shown in
Table 10 and Figure 11.
One can compare secondary market interventions with a relaxing of capital requirements, since QE
was used in part to encourage lending by banks who had experienced a contraction in capital. Our
results suggest that both policy interventions result in more mortgages, but impact different parts of
the market. Therefore, they have dramatically different distributional consequences across the income
spectrum and result in markedly different allocations of mortgage risk in the economy.
Mortgage Origination and Redistribution
Our counterfactuals suggest that the main effect of QE is to decrease conforming loan rates and
increase conforming mortgage lending volumes significantly: a 25 bp decrease in GSE rates leads to
an essentially one-to-one decrease in conforming loan rates and roughly $193 billion of new
conforming mortgage origination. Jumbo interest rates and volumes are largely unaffected. Aggregate
consumer surplus increases by roughly $35 billion, driven by both increased lending and lower
interest rates for existing borrowers.
An increase in GSE financing costs has a relatively smaller impact on interest rates and on lending
volumes because banks adjust on the balance sheet retention margin. A 25 bp increase in the cost of
a securitized conforming mortgage only leads to a 12 bp increase in conforming loan rates. As GSE
financing costs increase, banks make significant adjustments along the bank balance sheet retention
margin and substitute away from GSE financing and towards cheaper balance sheet financing. In this
scenario, conforming mortgage origination declines by only $88 billion, in comparison to the $193
billion increase caused by an equivalent GSE rate decrease. Jumbo origination volumes decrease
slightly because the increased conforming loan balance sheet financing crowds out jumbo lending
and increases jumbo origination costs slightly. Aggregate consumer surplus declines by roughly $17
billion, with individuals in higher-income markets seeing declines of roughly $8 billion, compared to
$1 billion in low-income markets.
This asymmetry in response to rate increases and decreases is more apparent in more extreme
scenarios. A 100 bp decline in GSE financing costs leads to roughly a 100 bp decline in conforming
interest rates. In contrast, a 100 bp increase in GSE financing costs leads to only a 33 bp increase in
conforming interest rates. This asymmetric response of interest rates again reflects the importance of
the bank balance sheet retention margin. As banks retain more loans on the balance sheet, the
sensitivity of mortgage interest rates to GSE rates decreases. Interestingly, absorbing these costs
through more balance sheet lending reduces banks’ ability to originate jumbo mortgages, leading to
slightly higher jumbo rates and slightly lower volumes. The implications for lending volumes and

19
     See, among others, Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011) and Di Maggio, Kermani, and Palmer (2019).



                                                         31
